all right here we go
first of all welcome James
I really have now my pleasure and
welcome again Chris so this is
essentially giving you an opportunity to
refute some of the things that Chris has
said about your film we should tell
everybody that you the producer of
game-changers yeah I was one of those
users I know you also from of course
from The Ultimate Fighter yeah
UFC and Chris this is your what fourth
appearance your fourth or fifth did you
get a chance to see what Chris had said
yeah I've watched you watched it okay
I've made a bunch of notes excellent
let's start from the beginning the
beginning of the show the beginning of
your film you talked about the
gladiators and all that stuff and the
the fact that you were shocked to find
out the day they had eaten the
vegetarian diet yeah I mean well you
know that's been misrepresented right so
even before the film came out people
like oh there's this vegan film coming
out it's freaking propaganda people were
judging the film before they'd seen it
right and the vegan sort of community
really pushed it like a look at this
documentary so there's been things
saying they claimed that the gladiators
were vegan right and if we can just
prove they think the whole film is based
on this premise that was just like an
inciting incident for me start digging
into it first of all
Fabian Kent said they were predominantly
vegetarian and I said they ate mostly
plants and that is what I couldn't
believe right so they wouldn't claim
they were vegan didn't even claim that
they were vegetarian or just fueled
mostly by plants you know and people say
oh you cherry picked one location it was
the only known gladiator burial site in
the world based on archaeological and
anthropological data at the time at the
time where you read the study there have
been other studies there's been there's
some have been questioned so like
there's one in York there's one in New
York at the time had a few gladiator
skeletons
and it was questioned whether that was
the thing but I'm happy to address every
critique but if you wouldn't mind I just
want to make sure that Chris round the
same page about how evidence is
evaluated sure so would you consider
yourself a nutrition expert no I would
consider myself someone who
is adept at reading the literature and
learning from experts in nutrition
medicine anthropology etc although I do
have master's level training in
nutrition okay so it is it fair to say
that any one study cannot show what you
know the human race should be doing is
that fair any ones that absolutely
so basically anytime you show us study
if you say something you have to give a
citation for it right you have fair to
say and then someone can claim it as
cherry-picked is that you've got to show
a study or some studies and then someone
can claim as cherry-picked right so what
we have to do in order to understand
nutrition is look at the totality of the
evidence and I'd want to make sure we're
on the same page and then we can address
each critique that's okay so there's
that core of my argument right exactly
so you would say is it fair to say like
this three main area so there would be
like preclinical data which would either
be in animals or in test tubes petri
dishes right there'd be observational
data where you look at people and see
how they're doing and obviously there's
the health user but healthy use a bias
potential and there's interventional
trials right so let's just take
trans-fats for example right you you
look in a petri dish at endothelial
cells and trans-fats and it's you can
see that it creates vascular information
in those cells right and then you look
at people to eat more trans fats and
they have higher levels of information
and then you can actually do
interventional randomized control trials
and you can tell that trans fats cause
inflammation so we basically all agree
that trans fats are bad based on all of
those data points is that fair all right
so therefore again if you start any one
study people can just someone can just
claim that you're cherry-picking
right you can just say everyone can say
that I could say that you're joking you
i'm cherry-picking not necessarily
because there are many analyses and
reviews that are sure for this purpose
look at the totality of evidence here in
the film for example pointing to many
meta analyses that summarize all the
research that's been done on the topic
that i wouldn't have said that that's
cherry-picking fair enough i agree with
that okay so basically in philosophy
there's this is a logical fallacy called
appeal to Authority right but in the
real world you know you have to look at
experts that are specialists in the
field so if I you know I just got so
deserved you know long ago
right so I went to shoulder surgeon I
didn't go to a dentist if I want to
learn about comedy or you know fighting
ounces I might come and talk to you
right if I want to learn about
acupuncture or understand chemo I might
come to Chris because you've got a
master's degree in traditional oriental
medicine you're a licensed acupuncturist
right so if I want to learn about that
Chris is someone that I might want to go
to so what I'm saying is the World
Health Organization the FAO the American
Heart Association the 2015 2020 Dietary
Guidelines are all suggesting to eat
predominantly plant-based diets right
and they're saying that vegetarian vegan
diets are healthier for all life stages
including for pregnancy childbirth so
through trial birth breastfeeding
adolescents athletes and so on okay
that's the general consensus can I just
just finish a little okay and so and
I've got a bunch of slides if anything
the position papers for all of these I
would also say that I'm on a
predominantly plant-based diet exactly
if you look at and what we argue if you
look at two-thirds of my plate is plants
this is my point
you're being unfair that's really really
unfair because last time you pointed out
that the totality of coverage of the
plate is not reflective of the calories
you set that on calories he's talking
about what is predominantly his diet
plants you gotta based on calories it's
always on that the the if you're saying
that your diet is predominantly
plant-based then either one we're on the
same page right well we're not because
the the main question here in my mind is
whether there's evidence that supports
being on a 100% plant-based diet with no
animal products versus a diet that
includes a lot of plant foods and some
animal foods I thought you were backing
the film which was talking about
plant-based diets so plant-based diets
means getting the vast majority of your
calories from plants well everything or
excluding that offers you but the
the film essentially was all about only
eating plants no okay kill you
dairy products will kill you know that
claim was never made see but there was a
connection there was not there was a
third connection no there was not just
what was the connection the connection
cigarettes was the the the way the
playbook that is being used by the sieve
as people are conflating like what the
hell PlayBook is the same the same way
using athletes and they're using
advertising we never made the claim
which I that was lean that then but be
clear so the PlayBook that was used by
the the smoking industry so they pay for
studies right right and and we know even
with food right this has been done with
cigarettes it's been done with drugs
it's been done with food research shows
that industry-funded studies of four to
four to eight times more likely to have
a conclusion in their favor for their
product so this is what the smoking
industry did then they got doctors to
say that smoking wasn't bad and then
they got athletes the show like hey
smoking is good that was the power that
we drew we never do that the parallel
that was drawn in what the hell so I
want to make that really clear there was
no and I've seen this in in articles
saying you know they they connected me
we didn't do that and if you watch the
film we never said I did you why did you
have that in there though if you're not
saying because they're using the same
playbook if you're not saying that meat
causes cancer you're saying claims that
chicken eating chicken and fish causes
cancer eating dairy causes cancer
doctors vegan vegan that's the oath
misrepresentation so can I just go back
can we just finish the evaluating
evidence Naida at each point every
critique so basically the consensus and
you're saying they're changing over time
they are changing because as we get
better at signs that becoming more the
recommendations becoming more
plant-based
despite industry influence from studies
and marketing and people being paid off
industry influence goes both ways the
sugar industry in the 60s I agree expose
pointing the finger at fad I's the
culprit so that's a straw man argument
he's not he's not saying you are saying
the sugar industry is terrible and I
would agree that but can I just agree
just finish the F value
but the thing about this section of the
film was you were making some sort of a
correlation between cigarettes and the
way that it was marketed away their
marketing rather than the way meat is
marketed correct so it's the same
company's exponent but why would you do
you would never do that about like
carrots or kale or predominantly healthy
but I didn't because I didn't do it but
if you're saying that you you you you're
connecting the two things you're
connecting something that clearly causes
cancer cigarettes now and these studies
that were made to show people that it
didn't they were paid off the studies
were fake
there was there were essentially
cherry-picked fake studies that were
financed by the tobacco industry direct
in order to get people to buy more
cigarettes you're making this same sort
of claim about me correct which means
you think that meat is bad I do okay
that's but that's where we're that's
where I we're not we can disagree I'm
almost finished with the evaluating
evidence so so basically what we did
when we expert interview the experts is
we chose leading experts in their
individual fields we collectively with
thousands of articles in the
peer-reviewed literature right so and
this was only the bummers about the
making of documentaries like you put the
lower third on people don't get to read
it so we had the chair of nutrition at
Harvard the president of American
College of Cardiology the lead delegate
of urology for the American Medical
Association the chair of anthropology at
Harvard the director of energy
environment resources at Chatham House
really respected so talking about vegan
doctors I saw some of them some one were
involved in hunting some we were
involved in animal testing I saw one of
them eating a chicken sandwich at lunch
said let's not say that like this was a
vegan bias coming into it because that's
just not true they're stretching out and
this is we were talking just about this
one section were you connecting
cigarettes and meat so you're saying
that the same Sordo deserves the same
playbook but there's no evidence that
meat is bad for you no but this is
something that's actually recently been
established by mainstream medicine you
understand that right that they've
released new studies releasing these new
studies saying that there's no longer
this concern that red meat causes cancer
or this is
appeal to Authority because I can find
many illustrious doctors and experts for
a highly qualified that will disagree
with my point of view that that a diet
must be a hundred percent plant-based
and I wouldn't say okay okay okay you
did but this was the connection that you
made with cigarettes in the film no yes
I think they're both promoting something
bad because there's a profit so you
think that meat is bad for you they're
promoting it knowing that it's bad yes
for profit okay so so all Chris has
today to debunk the film right is
convinced the people watching and
listening but he knows more about the
consensus and the experts in their field
like I would understand this is what
actually not that interested in
consensus of experts I'm looking at that
research that is published the
peer-reviewed research that is published
yeah the meta analyses and even reviews
of meta analyses that have been done a
perfect example is the whole dairy in
cancer section totally that we talked
about where you had argued or Walter
Willett argued that there's you know
dairy products caused cancer and I
pointed to a meta analyses that looked
at over a hundred and fifty different
reviews that 84% of those found no
associations so how is that not part of
this discussion where we're talking
about hundreds of scientists across
different continents different countries
they're using peer-reviewed science some
show this but in the movie just one
expert is pointing to you know one group
of studies without mentioning that that
sense that one right so this is the 2018
meta not have you got a slide for that
if not I've got your slide hundred and
seven slide hundred and seven no this is
a 2019 1953 studies right yeah and I can
get I'm really a lot further into it not
the only one I'd love to because at nine
o'clock last night until nine o'clock
last night
I thought Chris just made a bunch of
mistakes interpreting the data and I'm
gonna show you how he has misleading
people on this study okay so if you can
bring up the slide 117
is that can we see this like yeah okay
this is it okay
so you see what he's putting quotes okay
84% of meta-analyses on dairy
consumption showed either no association
or an inverse association between dairy
and cancer and then you go on to point
out what an inverse means is that people
ate more dairy get lower rates of cancer
that's what he's implying when you put
something in quotes what does that mean
to you it means us what he said yeah but
it's that quotation is quoting the study
right fair enough
is that what they said in the study no
that's not what they said in the study
that's right my summary of the evidence
of the study thank you but when you put
something quite that's misleaders his
quote okay fine but he's not putting
things in one else totally I mean that's
how when you when you when you anything
you do in literature when you put some
in quotation marks you're quoting the
study but let's let's just bypass that
I'll agree okay so can you bring up side
109 see what they actually said okay
this is the actual quote 10 out of 153
reported meta analyses comparing highest
versus lower dairy consumption 109 71%
showed no evidence of a systole
significant association between dairy
consumption and instance of cancers 20
showed a decreased risk of cancers with
dairy consumption and 24 showed an
increased risk of cancers with daring
sumption now this is actually until last
night like 9 o'clock I realized what he
was doing okay if you want to go to I
mean just to sum it up if you go to
slide 110 wait but can we see what's
your interpretation what do you do you
agree that that was the quote from the
study okay good but I'm asking you what
your interpretation it does that in your
mind show a strong connection between
dairy and cancer okay Joe you're gonna
really realize here what Chris is doing
okay this is really and I'm glad that
you bought it please answer what okay so
can I just say the reason you brought
this up is because Walter Willett said
there was a strong connection in
prostate cancer and dairy correct yeah
so you brought about something about all
cancers
okay yeah so and in this study about
half of the study showed a connection
between prostate cancer and dairy and
half didn't what so not a compelling
argument that dairy is associated with
cancer okay so can we got you got a coin
flip basically slide 110 well let's
let's stay with this explain this first
not we'll move to that's known as
sliding excellent is explaining okay
it's just breaking that down okay so
there was statistically significant
associations between dairy consumption
instead of cancers 71 percent showed no
evidence thirteen showed a decreased
risk in a sixteenth century an increased
risk so you see what Chris did to
represent this he added 71 and thirteen
to make eighty-four right voila this is
how you got it right so you added
seventy three percent seventy one
percent and 13 percent to Gaetti four
right so his statement from this study
was 84% showed no evidence or decreased
risk that's what he made you believe
well 71 percent shows no evidence the 13
percent shows decrease right circle you
add the two of them together that's 84
percent shows no evidence a great
increase risk directly but he could have
said his 71 percent plus six teams and
that's eighty-seven percent
he could have said eighty-seven percent
showed no evidence or an increased risk
its 84 one plus 16
oh so I could make the claim no evidence
or a decreased you were claiming in the
film was claiming dairy causes cancer my
claim was there's no the burp the bulk
of the evidence suggests there is no
association or inverse association
that's true no I agree
13 percent shows decreased risk okay so
the hold on a second yeah the decreased
risk and the increased risk are almost
the same talked about which is higher 3%
shows interest and this one's not the
point of this study is that this is his
study that he brought up showing this is
very strong evidence okay his statement
was very misleading
he added up those two
and then he finished it up by saying so
basically there's an inverse correlation
but he did not show he could have said
87% showed no risk or an increased risk
in church instead he chose to summarize
it saying 84% but there's no risk in
increased risk it's not going Joe
because you're talking about something
causing cancer
no I exactly and so he couldn't there
wasn't showing of things to find the
total cancer was increased right but we
just we know that as research shows this
included did it not industry funded
research um two-thirds of researches in
right and we know that we research shows
like are you are you proposing that we
throw out every study because the one of
the main studies in your film was
sponsored by the Hass avocado board the
one that claims that animal products
contribute to inflammation I'm not sure
I'm not sure that's right now I'm saying
industry-funded studies and by the way
industry-funded studies they typically
only put them out when it shows in their
favor there's no obligation for industry
when they do a study to release it yeah
I'm primarily a retired okay what do you
think that the industry and the meeting
guarantee is far more money than the
plant-based industry right you'd agree
with that actually we can look at some
statistics on that would you would you
disagree that industry funded research
has a four to eight times increased risk
compared to non industry funded research
in fine inclusions in their favor I
think and I think industry research is
definitely a problem but I see it as a
problem across the board and I have some
statistics and so do you not do you not
admit that you here led the audience to
believe that there was a potentially
decreased risk overall you made it sound
very high because you didn't split
between them no difference that was not
my intention it was just it was a data's
not to spend ten minutes as we're doing
now talking about one studying claim no
it's not accurate if there said showed
no evidence or showed an increased risk
84% daddy so 87 said that seems like
it's miss Lee I think that would be
misleading also do you run he could
so we're talking about something causing
cancer James exactly so he's making
increased risk is what we're looking for
well rocking for residents of it causing
cancer 71% the bulk of the evidence
shows no evidence that's exactly what
I've my point it doesn't show that you
honestly don't think that that statement
instead of just putting the sub norm
centered no evidence 13% show that would
be the fairest the most you know honest
explanation like summary of that
statement I would say that if you wanted
to say it the most accurately yes that's
the best way to say one percent showed
no evidence 13 percent showed decreased
risk but I don't have a problem with
saying 84 percent showed no evidence or
a decreased risk true cuz we're out
something causing cancer that's the
that's the relevant point the relevant
point is does the study show that dairy
causes cancer the the primary evidence
that most of the evidence says it shows
no evidence or it shows a decreased risk
that's the bottom of the bulk of the 84
percent versus 87 percent it does no no
87 percent shows increased risk is only
16 percent no evidence to increased risk
to get 87 percent okay let's throw out
the no evidence let's throw out no the
proof is to show evidence that indicates
the dairy causes cancer if you do a
study and it shows that it doesn't then
that's not in support of the claim
agreeing that the meta-analysis did not
could not find an association but I'm
also pointing out that industry-funded
studies were included in it and they are
more likely to find no connection so
there's a hundred fifty three studies
you're claiming we should just that all
of them are industry funded and we
should throw out this huge review of 153
meta-analysis because of industry
funding what is the basis for that claim
no I'm not I'm saying that it sways the
results can you you can't see that I
don't I don't like but you know I don't
accept it I have a hundred you just III
studies you accept they were that they
were in this meta analyses that
they're gonna sway the results to the
point where these findings aren't valid
and we could do the same thing with this
all of the studies that you have linked
to in the film well we can we can also
look at other studies on dairy and
cardio metabolic outcomes that we have
got lots of large reviews that we can
look at and again and you know this is a
pointless discussion to have if you're
just gonna sit there and say industry
funding my point solid that's not my
only point I think you're saying it
makes them suspect correct yes Greenview
about the cigarette thing how many of
the hundred and fifty three studies meta
analyses which each also had individual
studies in them are are so so biased by
industry funding that we can't count on
the phone well I would hope that you
would know more than I I mean basically
you've I would you know this is a this
this we can't get very far in this
discussion if you're gonna claim that we
can't even talk about studies in the
peer-reviewed literature because
industry funding completely biases the
finding no I'm not saying that's the
case I'm saying just because they
couldn't even though there were more
showing an increase than showed a
decrease risk right I am saying that
it's possible that the the industry fund
that's a misleading statement more
showed increase than decreases Corral
but there's 71 percent showed no me with
that oh I agree I agree so that's a wash
it's not even those two a wash no it's
not a wash if you have a hypothesis this
thing causes cancer and then you do a
ton of studies and there's no
association that's an that hypothesis is
no longer correct it's not a wow that's
actually that's actually not true based
on epidemiology if you have ten studies
that show no association and ten that
show an association then you don't have
that at all I'm not again not like what
he said you have eighty four percent
that shows the opposite you could say
eighty four percent showed no evidence
and then you can forget about decreased
risk just say eighty four percent showed
no evidence forget about decreased risk
right you sit still have only 16 percent
showed an increase risk right
do an epidemiology study or you have to
take into account all the other factors
in these persons lives totally about
whether they whether they drink whether
they smoke totally they exercise well
you know sedentary lifestyle there's a
lot of factors so that would if you had
something that was causing cancer you
would expect the results to be flipped
you would expect the results to be 16%
showed no showed no evidence 71% or 84%
showed an increase that would be
something you'd say hey this is causing
cancer this is more like that's not
however demonology work so if you if you
had what buddy me ology is slippery and
I agree that not happy me ology works if
you've got if you have even if you had
ten studies showing no evidence just cuz
you don't find something doesn't mean
that it exists okay the absence of
evidence is not the evidence of absence
okay let's say this if you if you had a
hundred studies and seventy of those
studies showed an increased risk of
cancer would you say that thing causes
cancer most likely most Wow if it is all
epidemiology then it's okay so now let's
do 100 studies and 70% now show no
evidence yeah would you say it's most
likely that there's no evidence no
that's not how it works
oh so if you've got seventy studies that
can couldn't show a correlation and 30%
that did that is still in favor of
showing that there is a correlation but
no no no we're not now we're doing 70
study if 70% look it was 70% of the
people in these studies if you have all
these studies you have 100 studies and
70% of the people in all these studies
are showing an increased risk of cancer
we would agree right this is why you
can't prove causation based on
observational but right now if it's
reversed now if 70% of these studies
show there's no increased risk of cancer
or 84% four eighty four percent which is
because you add in the decreased risk
when we're not even adding the decreased
risk which shows that you're less likely
to get cancer which is almost the same
as an increased risk of cancer which in
my eyes is a wash you would assume that
we're talking about something that
doesn't give you cancer well I mean that
that's I agree that this study found
that there were they couldn't prove a
causation right they couldn't prove a
link between cancer but you made it out
like he was being deceptive is being
deceptive I don't agree that I don't
agree with that because you try
you're trying to show that these studies
are proving or at least making this
correlation between consumption of dairy
products and cancer but the evidence
doesn't show that if you want to look at
it in its entirety the evidence shows
that most of the 71% showed no evidence
of it causing cancer
13% showed it's actually better for you
you have less risk of cancer than not
eating dairy 13% showed increased risk
of cancer and again when you talk about
epidemiology studies when you're talking
about you know 16 out of a hundred you
you have to throw in all the other facts
right and that's why they didn't find it
but can I just the reason you brought
this up is prostate cancer right and and
so if you look at slide one thirteen
prostate cancer was that's disturbing so
it's 5050 with dairy consumption versus
that's not one try one thirteen but a
lot of people get prostate cancer too
isn't that an also an issue that's a
high as well isn't that a high risk for
males prostate cancer yes it's a high
one whether it's our 112 whether they
consume milk or not
so just so in this metric Lance that you
point to the highest connection that
they could find between dairy and any
type of cancer was processing cancer so
if you look at the black line that shows
no association if you look at the green
line that's decreased Association and
the red line was increased Association
that was the meta-analysis that you
provided yeah so you brought you brought
this study up because dr. Walter Willett
who is the chair of nutrition Harvard
he's one of the most published nutrition
scientists of all time if not the most
published a disagreement right and so he
is coming to the determination that
prostate cancer is linked then it's
likely that it's causal and there's very
slow up back up half and a half that's
not evidence of a causal relationship
dance there's no evidence not a causal
relationship okay dr. Walter Willett is
in just about any type of study then
appeal to Authority you just said
yourself that's a rhetorical fallacy no
it's it's a it's a fallacy and message
that appeal to valid Authority because
literally if I want to know are you
saying like so if
I want let me look at mixed martial arts
and Chris goes well I've never done
mixed martial arts but I think I know
more about anthropology nutrition like I
know more about boxing kickboxing
jiu-jitsu and wrestling so we're telling
people out the Consensus we're talking
about leading experts in their field
with thousands out there reviewed census
there are experts who would disagree and
would look at this study and reach the
same exact conclusion right I did some
researches there's no reliable no
there's no reliable proven connection
between dairy and prostate you have half
studies showing an association half
studies showing no association not to
mention the fact that that's as you just
said that even if there was a strong
correlation that doesn't prove causation
you said you like this because it
included also randomized controlled
trials yeah and I think should be should
be trust Walter Willett who at the time
was the chairman Justice studies but
we're way off here the question was
still you know the there are a lot of
inferences made in the film whether you
they were intentional or not on your
part that you know dairy people are
hearing o'deary is gonna cause prostate
cancer they're gonna extend that to
cancer there are other claims in the
film made about dairy and metabolic prop
and saturated fat and metabolic issues
so the operative question that I'm
trying to answer is do the data support
that not just Walter Willett think that
or any other expert in the film do the
data support that conclusion right and
even in that study it the data don't
strongly support that if you have half
studies saying yes half studies saying
no that's not a clear signal and it's
definitely not evidence of a causal
relationship so so having Walter Willett
or anyone say there's a strong
relationship and we know the mechanism
and there's you know it's causal that
capacitor by the study can I posit
didn't you tell me that two-thirds of
people have an intolerance towards
towards milk and dairy and I have a
study here is that what the number is it
why not two out of three people in the
world okay because this is actually to
your point so two out of three people
have an intolerance towards dairy in the
world and if you're talking about a
study that shows 50% of the people in
these studies that are consuming dairy
there's a correlation between prostate
cancer and and Derek mm-hmm
wouldn't you assume that maybe the same
thing that we're talking about with
two-thirds of people are intolerant to
something they consume this thing that's
in tolerate causes inflammation in the
body and that inflammation the body
could possibly be leading to cancer
correct no not correct very dairy is
inversely associated with inflammation
so inverse associated with inflammation
but if people are irritated by dairy if
they have an intolerance to dairy and
you said two-thirds of people here's
here's what I would suspect there that
if you we segmented those people out and
said let's do a study find out who's
intolerant of dairy and find out who
isn't you would see even better results
for dairy because despite the fact that
some people are lactose intolerant we're
still seeing in that meta-analyses that
you know most people there's no
association in most cases and a inverse
association in other cases hold on a
second but this prostate cancer thing is
not moles why this is 50/50 right no and
what you're saying you're saying if half
of okay but if there he gives half
people cancer right and doesn't give
their dog answer and I can just think
dairy second of all do you see what
Christmas did that's not what that's Ted
but you see ology James it's not dairy
gives anyone cancer it's Association oh
that's your meta analysis included
randomized nice time this is actually to
you can I stop this though wouldn't if
someone's intolerant of something that
means your body is irritated by it means
it causes some sort of disturbance right
whether it's inflammation or
gastrointestinal disorder you start
farting and that's what happens when
people are lactose intolerant right that
irritates the body wouldn't there be
wouldn't you assume that something your
body is intolerant to would possibly be
the cause of distress
sugar disease certain thing could be
right so now if every but if you're
looking at two-thirds of the population
are intolerant why your that cause
prostate cancer and no other cancers I
don't that doesn't make that's why it
when you see that kind of thing in the
data it's a red flag because there's no
logical explanation for why it would
cause prostate cancer but no other
cancers is there more of an association
there with with that Jamie pull up but
just Google dairy products and
inflammation review of the clinical
evidence and this is a review systematic
review of 52 clinical trials and they
found that dairy products were inversely
associated with inflammatory markers
which means that people who consume
dairy actually had lower levels of
inflammatory markers so the hypothesis
that dairies inflammatory and that's why
it's causing cancer doesn't seem to hold
up in the literature so so can I just
say so first of all you know there's
this that might be studies he can bring
up I'm not even a nutrition scientist
I'm gonna come like a combatives trainer
right and so you also said that you're
not an expert in nutrition and so what
we have to believe today is that Chris
really is it is about the meta-analysis
but it's about the meta-analysis it's
about the totality of taking into
account all the evidence not just one
meta-analysis or a meta-analysis of a
meta-analysis but all of the data and so
what you're asking people to believe is
that you are better at interpreting the
data than people that are experts in
their field many experts who would agree
with me didn't choose to interview them
in the film no actually we did interview
some that I can tell you about in a
second on the other side not to be why
we didn't include them but you are
asking people I would understand it if
suddenly Chris has figured out this new
travaux diet that he figures out
something about nutrition that he's
better than the consent he knows more
about the consensus and more about the
majority of leading experts but to
believe that Chris knows more about
anthropology urology heart disease knew
why is environment apology because that
what you try to do anthropology and
because a majority of anthropologists
agree with what I said
you chose the probably one of the few
that would agree with the idea that he
primarily ate a plant you know
exclusively plant-based diet for promote
of human evolution we can go into that
again I'm actually representing the
consensus viewpoint in anthropology
James and you'll be hard-pressed to find
a consensus group of experts that agree
with that idea so you're saying that the
check you're saying that Richard rang
and the chair of anthropology that we
interviewed does not represent the
scientific consensus of anthropology if
you're arguing that he is is saying that
humans primarily ate plant-based diet
for and didn't and animal products were
not a significant part of our diet
through evolution then yes that's what
I'm saying it depends so we came from
the equator right but I want to go back
as I guess because are you arguing that
there's a dominant consensus among
nutrition experts in the US that
everyone should be on a vegan diet No so
what's the what's the argument here that
we should people should eat plants and
my argument is yes they should and and
internal products can also be part of
that neutral or healthy omnivorous diet
and I think you would find a dominant
consensus of nutrition experts that
agree with that so it should be let that
that's not the way this film is being
interpreted there was a bias going into
it so for example when you go to the US
military right the game changes the
first documentary that has ever been
accredited by the defense health agency
for the Department of Defense it's the
first documentary that has ever been
supported by the Special Operations
Medical Association they didn't come
into it looking at the science this has
been evaluated by hundreds of PhD
researchers to come to that conclusion
okay they did not leave it how so
they've been evaluated how so
you can't get an accreditation here in
the video is yes valuated by the
department of defense health agency of
the Department of Defense which decides
what the military's eating they don't
give a crap about oh let's let's base
our diets on ever on evolution they care
on what is the science and the doctor
game-changers is the first documentary
that's ever been accredited by the
defense health agency there you can look
at this and go ok this is a vegan
propaganda film
why are you saying that hundreds of PhDs
have reviewed this and reviewed all the
data in it to come to this conclusion
and is this proven is this printed this
is some published paper where it shows
hundreds of people have reviewed this
film and found all the claims to be
credible and that all the debunking zuv
it or not the defense health agency has
reviewed this film in detail digging
into each of the studies right but
you're saying you again called to
Authority you're saying hundreds of PhDs
have have studied this who are the
people well there's there's a lot from
the defense health agency there's a lot
of people this special operation
Bagration that came to the decision and
these are master's degrees and nutrition
PhD in nutrition to get that
accreditation that just hasn't happened
before
because they didn't come into it
thinking this is a vegan propaganda film
that was the bias going into it we're
again talking a lot about experts and
their experts in their opinions and not
Chris Crestor in his opinion it's not no
this is not about my opinion and Ike we
can fill the room with experts who agree
with me you had an expert a debate with
a doctor in the UK on a TV show who
disagreed with you we can always always
find people who agree and disagree with
all kinds of different credentials it's
disingenuous to claim like I said that I
I'm not here to argue that plants are
unhealthy and that we shouldn't be
eating a lot of plants this is the
fallacy that gets creative with these
kinds of films it's not a choice between
a standard American diet and crappy
processed food diet that contains meat
or a vegan diet right it's there is a
possibility of a plant-based diet a diet
that has a lot of plants that also
contains animal products and that
compares comparing that with a 100%
plant-based diet that is the operative
question the book the film the film is I
believe that meat and dairy are bad for
you the film talked about promises you
believe that I think there's sufficient
evidence about that
if you look at our website and telling
you know people are wanting a resources
on what to eat they said if we say it's
all or something it doesn't have to be
all or nothing so we were talking about
okay but that's nice but what you just
said you think that meat is bad for you
yeah please dairy and you know I could
see the argument if we're talking about
two thirds of people being lactose
intolerant I would see the argument that
for two thirds of people dairy is
probably not good for you doesn't
support that but but I mean we can say I
can what is lactose intolerant if you're
intolerant of something that means your
body's not enjoying it and by the way
that's not the only issue with no that's
a giant number two thirds of people are
lactose intolerant if you would if you
set your body's intolerant of something
but you keep consuming that thing that
your body's intolerant of I would
naturally assume as a absolute admitted
non expert that that's not good so two
things here number one I've always for
years have written that dairy is very
individual and depends on your tolerance
number two there are a lot of dairy
products with virtually no lactose in
them so cheese for example hard cheeses
no lactose you know cream no lac very
little lactose butter very no lactose g
no lactose yogurt fermented dairy
products like kefir no lactose so while
I agree with what you're saying if
someone is lactose intolerant they
should avoid dairy products that contain
lactose when you look at the studies on
dairy and connections with conditions
like cancer inflammation which I just
pointed out with this study and you look
at cardio metabolic outcomes which I'd
like to cover because that includes
heart disease and diabetes and
overweight obesity etc there is not any
strong evidence that dairy contributes
to those conditions so let's let's look
at those actual studies Chris what you
you talk really badly against
epidemiologist I can't prove causation
and then when you like it you cite it so
you'll give epidemiological that's the
same way with you James both ways that's
right
okay so you can if the burden of proof
if you're claiming that something is bad
for you yeah the burden of proof is on
you Shawn meaning
so you can't say it's bad for you and
then I show epidemiological studies and
RCTs by the way that were included in
that meta analyses that don't support
that and then you say oh we can't trust
the research no I'm sorry your hypocrisy
is saying that you say that you said the
epidemiology that's observational
studies just looking at people you have
said that we can't rely on those and
then you then cite them yourself I
didn't say we can't rely on epidemiology
I say you have to consider the caveats
it with epidemiology but again the
burden of proof if you're claiming that
a food is bad for you the burden of
proof is on you research that it is so
for example first of all there's an
inflammatory mediators for example like
heme iron
second of all we look at population data
and we show increased causes of
morbidity and mortality for people that
eat less meat or they eat no meat so
there's there's increase causes of
morbidity you just said it's yeah sorry
decreases decreased risk of morbidity
and mortality
let's just be real clear on that because
you said it wrong let's look at two
randomized controlled trials see these
are not observational studies the the
first found that increasing red meat
consumption by replacing carbohydrates
in the diet of individuals without
anemia actually reduced markers of
inflammation
sorry replacing what sorry carbohydrates
yes what you said sorry so Jamie if you
want to pull this I mean these are all
on the website crecer dot Co slash
game-changers but that's that study is
called increased lean red meat intake
does not elevate markers of oxidative
stress and inflammation in humans I
believe a study exists I mean that
doesn't so these are RCTs randomized so
so they're actually controlling it
instead of just looking at observational
data which is subject to healthy user
bias these are the RCT so that's yeah
that's one study and then there's
another one another are CTE in women
with anemia inflammation markers on a
diet high in red meat were not
significantly different from the
on a diet high in oily fish and then
there are also numerous studies of paleo
diets but which contain meat and other
types of animal protein and show that
they decrease markers of inflammation
including CRP there's randomized
controlled trials showing reductions in
interleukin 6 and also in tumor necrosis
factor-alpha
in these diets so all of this suggests
it's not the meat it's what you eat with
the meat that makes the difference sorry
we have studies of chlorophyll eating
chlorophyll rich green vegetables yep
decreases the formation of n nitroso
compounds with me we'll have lots of
studies showing that when you eat plants
along with the meat then you don't see
the effects that you might see if you're
just eating right standard American diet
I agree so I off sex like some so if an
animal foods crates oxidative stress you
have it with the plant foods and that
would have the antioxidant and that
would offset it is that basically it's a
little more complicated yeah I think it
is more complicated than that as I said
last time and as I've always argued I'm
not a proponent of corn the carnivore
diet I'm not a low-carb guy I'm not a
keto guy I'm my fundamental argument is
just that the optimal human diet
contains both plant and animal foods and
this focus on individual food components
or macro nutrients like protein or fat
or carbohydrate we've gotten too much
it's called nutritionism it's just
focusing on these individual elements
and ignoring the overall pattern of diet
quality which is the most important
thing and that's what a lot of the more
recent studies are showing when you look
at the diet pattern and the diet quality
on its on you know overall that's what
actually makes a difference in terms of
health and lifespan not how much of this
fat how much of that fat whether there's
you know red meat or white meat or fish
or whatever it's the pattern let me
because this is this is one of the
primary misconceptions that people have
about consuming meat when they hear
studies that say that meat is associated
with mortality or high cholesterol or
disease are all these different factors
we are talking about these kinds of
studies where people fill out a form
tell us what you eat yeah how many days
a week do you eat meat how many days a
week do you eat this what they don't
take into account is whether or not
these people are going to Wendy's
whether or not they're eating a
grass-fed steak and and and you know and
broccoli something healthy there's a
giant difference between those two
things but they're lumped in together
because this is meat consumption yeah
there's the studies aren't perfect for
sure but you were saying that basically
look at saying we should look at
outcomes and not just look at individual
markers right is that basically no I'm
saying we should look at the diet
quality the overall diet pattern so if I
example Christopher Gardner did a study
at Stanford a couple years ago and he
took - instead of saying you know low
fat low carb he took two groups and he
advised them all to basically eat a
healthy diet and then one group ate a
low-fat healthy diet and the other group
ate a low-carb healthy diet they all
lost weight it wasn't that big of a
difference between the two I agree I
agree so first of all in terms of health
I would be pretty my opinion would be
I'm pretty much micronutrient agnostic
so I wouldn't like I'm not advocating
high carb or low carb I think that
people can do healthy and well I think
for athletes they need a lot more carbs
and a sauce getting those from plants I
think there's certain athletes that can
if it's slow in steady state where
you're getting more fat oxidation I
think that you know stone steady state
athletes can do but like an MMA fighter
or a soccer player but you just said
that you were you were not low-carb
right you said you're not low cop I'm
not I'm not a low carb I advocate I've
written articles called seven things
seven reasons you should be cautious I'm
not saying I'm not local Oh carb
advocate I don't believe everyone should
be on a low-carb diet
Chris has his own he doesn't have the
consensus definitions of carbohydrate
levels you've made up your own
definitions right when did I make up my
own slide eighty Jeremy if you do that
please
I just point out that Zach bitter the
man who I had on the podcast yesterday
who holds the world record in running a
hundred miles in 11 hours and I think
it's 18 minutes
he's on a low carbohydrate diet yeah and
again you know those slow and steady
state you can do well so you so Chris
your recommendation your your definition
of low carb is 10 to 15% if you know the
next slide really want so if you look at
the peer-reviewed literature it's either
less than 30% or the next slide really
less than 40% like if you look across
all the literature's less than 30 or 40
moderate carb according to Chris next
slide Jamie would be 15 to 30
peer-reviewed literature next car and
next slide 40 to 65 and then high carb
Chris calls more than 30% in the
peer-reviewed literature high carb more
than 65 and the next slide more than 70
depending on the peer-reviewed
literature so you've come up with your
own definitions of what is low moderate
and high carb yeah just for the purpose
of my work with people that that's not
relate I wasn't trying to represent
research there sure that's what I
consider to be low carb moderate carb
and high carb in my work with patients
my recommendation did you know him says
he did I mean that is what you said I
mean you when you wrote this out you did
have a different definition than the P
that you do slider to that by his
definition have your own idea and he
said no you heard him say yes yeah so
slide slide idea whose dream so I just
want to sum this up but what's the point
here I said that everyone should be on a
low-carb diet no I agree and I I've
always argued that it depends on
everything from your genes to your
exercise patterns where are you getting
your numbers from like when you write
low carb moderate carbon high carb you
make them up this is just a wreck this
this is a clinical recommendation from
my experience working with patients I'm
not representing the scientific
literature here I'm not trying to make
arguments about madness but that's
absolute madness
to come up with your own definition and
this is why I feel that Chris does gay
and when you have people like Chris on
at multiple times
it throws people's perception office of
what is a healthy diet because Christmas
represents the data he comes up with his
own definitions of things he
misrepresents things that we said in the
film okay let's just talk about this
real quick what so when we're talking
about low carb moderate carb or high
carb when you're recommending to your
patients
low carb moderate carb or high carb
these definitions how are you coming to
these conclusions it's made them up no
based on so there are a lot of people
James that disagree with the the car the
range is signed and yeah there's a
scientific consensus how many different
scientists were were polled on this how
many different studies were shown I
don't know is this something that you
just found that disputes his position
it's like a large group of no this is
okay so slide 89 consider Verta health
who uses you know vert the folks at
Verta who are all scientists and these
they used a ketogenic very low carb diet
to you will not be in ketosis at 30%
carbohydrate or 25 percent or 20 percent
or even 15 percent so you know that and
and then you know 40 to 65 percent
you're not you're not-- you're not even
in the ballpark you know so if we're
thinking about using low carbohydrate
diets for example for weight loss or for
diabetes or you know metabolic issues
like Verta health is doing then you
low-carb is not going to be 30 to 40
percent look like that's not gonna work
so that's where my recommendation
rhombic based meiosis based on you know
based on the optimal range if you have
if you look at the rest of the article
it's going to be like if you've got
diabetes
you've got you're overweight you're
obese you're trying to lose weight this
is the range that I've found and other
experts like the people at Verta health
have found will be most effective and
these are its branches there's no
representation that this is the range
that is defined as low carb in the
scientific literature
so you're do you're tall you calling it
low carb because if someone's on a
ketogenic low-carb diet in order to get
into ketosis you have to have a low
number of carbohydrates actually
probably even below 10 it's not even
just to be in ketosis like just to get
the the maximal weight loss you know
someone could be at 15% and still right
way to us without being in Quito I got
her in dropped because you just like in
the last five minutes you showed a study
from trying to prove your own point but
low carb and low fat people had equiv
equivalent fat loss you just said that
so why not you now all of a sudden
advocating only low carb diets for only
low carb that they can both work for
different people James you're
misrepresenting what he was saying what
he was saying is getting people to go on
a healthy diet versus the standard
American diet yeah so he's not just
talking about low carb versus high carb
what he's talking about is getting off
bullshit like processed foods and sugar
and eating I totally agree really and
when you do that people no matter what
low carb or high carb lose weight but I
think you will agree as well as almost
anybody would that getting on a low
carbohydrate diet and forcing your body
into ketosis makes your body burn fat
that's one way that's true but it's it's
proven right not the other piece of this
is most of the studies aren't comparing
healthy omnivorous diet with a you know
plant-based vegan diet they're comparing
a vegan diet with a standard American
diet that contains animal preserve or
diet yes by the way yeah has any of your
work or your ideas been published in the
scientific literature I've never claimed
it I just I just wondered so you didn't
wonder no I did one that we were saying
that you were saying that to try to make
it seem that he's less of an expert
yes I'm not an expert either so what
what's the point why I'm here because
why am I here well I actually I did ask
if I could bring my chief science
advisor who has a double master's degree
in exercise physiology and nutrition
he's a registered dietician he built
with his papers and we can talk about
him totally but I think we should so
first of all we just we still haven't
come to this understanding of why you
think meat is bad for you
you were basing it well okay so there's
the individual components like heme iron
for example we talked about that last
time the heme iron is only associated
with poor outcomes in the US it's not
not true it's not it's not true in other
countries it's not true bang
meta-analysis which looks at most of the
studies that have been done on that and
then if you also consider that when you
add green vegetables and other plant
foods spices and all of that it reduces
the oxidative capacity of heme iron and
reduces the absorption of heme iron and
you know again we're talking about diet
pattern not just is red are you eating
red meat oh you know in McDonald's and
fast food restaurants but if are you
eating it in the context of an overall
healthy diet and does that have the same
effect right do you know how do you read
a forest block yes or no
I don't what does that mean that's
basically looking at the statistically
competent individual the forest Bligh's
to plot plot okay
that kind of looks like a bunch of trees
right okay so you don't know how to read
a forest plot so have you actually
looked at the study the study
okay so I'll just read on how to read it
so it's kind of so get a microphone on
you James just pull that sucker over so
you see the first of all he said that
what he put up on the screen and if he
still got the slide but you said that
the he- OCA ssin was only in Americans
right but the conclusion of that study
said that heme iron was associated with
cardiovascular disease that was a
conclusion study which he didn't put up
on the screen
okay I'd like the quote I put up was
with respect to heme iron intake we
found a significant association only in
the studies that were based on American
cohorts right so there's two things
about that was from the study okay first
thing I can't link to my slide I don't
know where it is but basically can you
just read the conclusion of that study
because I can't fly my slide the
conclusion this is down here a higher
dietary intake of heme iron is
associated with an increased risk of
cardiovascular disease whereas no
association was found between seat
cardiovascular disease and non-heme iron
intake or total iron intake okay so and
then also then I just read the quote
just now which was incorrect by the way
the authors made a mistake so how did
they make mistake so if you look at this
forest plot for example this Kipps team
grow bush and you can go and look at the
I've looked at the individual studies
that they were referencing in the
meta-analysis as my scientific thing so
basically you see this this is a 1.86
with a constant interval being one point
one four to three point zero nine okay
that is statistically significant
connection between heme iron and you can
look at the the conclusions and what
you're saying that what he said about
eating it with green leafy vegetables I
don't think this is real no first of all
unlike the dairy one where I think that
he was being a bit misleading in this
case I don't think he was been repeating
I think yeah I think that you read there
was no misleading
it was summarizing we already went over
this okay
create that impression but in this case
I do not think he was being misleading
at all it did say what you said in the
study even though you didn't point out
the conclusion you left out the
conclusion of the study but what wasn't
your fault is I think you I think you
read the study but you you admitted that
you can't you don't know how to read
forest plots and the forest plots if you
did look at them you knew how to read
them you'd show that there are three in
the Netherlands and in Sweden that did
show a significant correlation
because what you were trying to make out
with this point which I understand when
you're trying to when you have a point
of view and you're trying to work it
backwards what you end up doing is you
try and find studies that suit your
position and so you went and found this
study and you found a quote even though
you didn't like to put the conclusion of
the study no I did say that they were
did acknowledge that there was an
association but American cohorts but
it's not in there but it's not it's not
your fault because the study the people
in that whoever wrote the the write-up
for the study made a mistake there were
statistically significant because one
point one four to three means that there
was like a 14% to 300% increase in that
one study of from the Netherlands the
Kerstin klippstein crow Bush and for
people watching they can go and look at
the study look at the conclusions yeah
there were three because his point was
what you tried to infer from that was
that the American diet that includes a
bunch of junk food is different than the
ones in Sweden the Netherlands where
they aren't eating so much junk food but
that actually was incorrect so he mine
has been associated and is recognized
yes it has been associated and we still
have the studies that eating fruits and
vegetables attenuate the oxidative
capacity from he mine reduce absorption
of iron in the gut and now we're
focusing on a single mechanism rather
than looking at the outcomes right which
again I'm happy to look at the outcomes
do you agree with what he just said I do
same iron I think that plant foods
offset the oxidation offset and
something some regard the oxidation that
you get from animal foods however if you
work out you have oxidative stress okay
so if you want to have a meal do you
want the plant foods in the meal to be
dealing with the oxidative stress from
the animal foods or do you want the
plants to deal with the oxidative stress
allow you to recover faster and your
next workout will be better I don't
think we know that's true no we do know
because we're not focusing on the
nutrients in red meat and the things
that and the highly bioavailable protein
it's not like red meat is only there to
cause I is is causing oxidative stress I
agree it's not the only thing there are
some nutrients in me so again the
question is is there a place for animal
foods in a diet that
overall not not whether you know you
should eat plant foods right we both
agree that you should probably a lot of
plant foods right which is my position I
think it would be difficult for me to
argue a hundred percent plants versus 50
percent plants I don't think it's argued
to a delight argue like 90 95 percent
plants versus I think the argument would
take hours and hours and hours to
convince you why I think 100 percent
plants is but I think there's definitely
bio variability and I think different
people have a second I want to make sure
I understood what can you repeat that so
my position is that the literature
I think it's an easier argument because
we're talking about plant-based diets
and plant-based diets we do either
limiting or or limiting or eliminating
animal products right so for plant-based
general diets in general right so a
vegan may be some vegetarian like if you
eat turkey on Thanksgiving and then you
eat fish once a month I would say that's
a plant-based diet you're getting the
vast majority of calories from plants
right and I think there's a lot most
people even if you're eating pasta
you're getting the vast majority of your
calories from plants well yeah but if
we're talking about what's a healthier
the healthiest diet that's the problem
right I think whole plant food a lot of
shitty American diet its plant-based
you're talking about buns and bread and
yeah bullshit butter and jelly sorry a
lot of vegans and vegetarians just cuz
you're vegan or vegetarian doesn't mean
your health exactly right it's like the
my argument leaders you're getting vast
majority of your calories from whole
plant foods right okay agreed okay you
agree well I don't think the vast
majority is my position but I think
that's his position right I agree what
he's saying I think that look I I eat
animal products I have for a long time
and I eat a lot of vegetables as well I
think that an omnivorous diet is is the
key to health that's what I believe yeah
I I believe that meat helps you recover
faster I think it's more nutrient rich I
think there's things in me that it's
very difficult to get in plants and I
think the quality of the amino acids and
the quality of the protein can be
superior to that in plants my definite
again what's to talk about that because
that's one of the things you brought up
and I kind of just say this agree with
the type of meat that you eat
we know that like there's not studies
done on the inflammation in ELQ but
there is Studies on inflammation in
kangaroos for example in Australia so
totally wild ports that's like their
equivalent of elk right and there is
about half the inflammation coming from
that as there is from beef why would
imagine I mean you're talking about a
much healthier much higher protein
because the difference between the
protein content in elk per ounce versus
the protein content and beef is almost
double its a giant controlled trials I
showed that showed less inflammation
with eating red meat no the thing is
that's it's tricky because when is
something healthy or something
inflammatory it's always compared to
what so in some of these studies what
the industry does is they'll compare red
meat to bacon or that or you know that
which it up there's always to watch it
works the other way around they compare
a plant-based diet with a standard crap
Western diet no I agree that's what you
saying meat is bad for you well so he I
mean we just heard with the heme iron
but the heme iron in conjunction with
plant-based foods like you are showing
who said it's because of the is that one
of the primary reasons is because of
oxidation and the oxidants deal with
oxidation you get oxidant you get pro
oxidation from animal foods right you
also get pro oxidation from exercise
alright we're talking about
Makina you know isolated mechanisms
right about but Chris you talked about
mechanisms when you want to and you talk
about preclinical data when you want to
I was talking about them in response to
the claims made in the film because on
our European isms were mentioned neu5gc
TMAO heme iron and so I brought those up
in you know to respond to that's not
when you use them because if you go on
your website maybe I'm not saying we
shouldn't ever talk about mechanisms
genes I'm saying if if you're talking
about mechanisms but the outcomes don't
support the mechanism then what's the
point
well I think we can get into
epidemiology can look at that but I
think we should definitely hit protein
because I think of everyone watching
that's the biggest myth and it would be
just sort of gripe and I think we should
definitely be 12 so I wanna make sure
would be 12 because one of the things
that you said that he disputed was
did bring up that b12 quote that you
said was complete horseshit I can read
it out if you want good please b12 is
this in if you disagree with what you
were reading b12 isn't made I'll read
the whole thing and then so b12 isn't
made by animals it's made by bacteria
these animals consume in the soil and
water just like with protein animals are
only the middle men before industrial
farming farming farm animals and humans
could get b12 by eating traces of dirt
on plant foods or by drinking water from
rivers or streams but now because
pesticides antibiotics and chlorine kill
the bacteria that produces vitamin even
finer moles have to be given b12
supplements and you said that's just all
false that's all just factually wrong so
first of all b12 is made by bacteria but
it's animals don't get it from consuming
the soil and water first of all you
misrepresented what I said so I said
it's made by bacteria that these animals
consume you went on to say that animals
didn't get bacteria from the soil that's
not what I said I said they'd get it
from the bacteria that they got from the
soil so you misrepresented what I said
you you know that the key claims you
made James is that as pot it was pot
used to be possible to get b12 by eating
dirt or on plant foods or out from
drinking water from rivers or streams
I've still have not seen convincing
evidence that okay so I was like 14 Jack
Norris a vegan diet ition has admitted
as much in his article and then even
more relevant than all of that is
looking at b12 deficiency rates between
vegans vegetarians and omnivores in the
clinical literature like the the other
stuff is not really relevant until you
get the clinical address each of your
critiques then is that okay yeah so
first of all you said there's zero
evidence the b12 is fed to cattle right
you said that and so can I just first
you return it because I said even farm
animals can you put up slide 44 please
Damon I said even farm animals have to
be given b12 supplements that's what I
said okay so did you mean all farm
animals okay so so do you see that
is a screencap from the film that's a
chicken and down at the bottom there's
the quote for the poultry right
so would you a disagreement and chickens
and no I don't disagree that they
sometimes get b12 but do what about
shellfish shellfish are extremely high
in b12 they're the highest even total
non sequitur and it's because the
implication in the film was the only
reason you get b12 from eating animal
products is because they're given b12
supplements so yeah are you you in
certainly said you're really suggesting
that the like the population gets most
of its b12 from shellfish no okay I'm
saying that the claim that animals need
to take b12 supplements in order to have
b12 in their flesh so he's not waking
chickens got it from it James why do you
think about the shellfish was I never
claimed chicken was a great circle I
said you I said in the film even farm
animals have to be complete resins you
said that it was absolutely false
everything that I said about me girl you
said was absolutely false as well this
is also you talking about the people
used to be able to get it from consuming
vegetables right okay that can be read
on it and that the water is now because
of pesticides and I mean the water no
longer has you claimed that the same
percentage of you you picked one study
that showed equal the rates of
deficiency and I heard the huge amount
of literature that shows big differences
between vegans vegetarians and efficient
I know all of your critiques because
I've noted them and I've got a point for
each one so can I just go children and
then you can if you disagree you can so
could you just general could you blood
slide 45 and I know rather than throwing
off track going to about humans we'll
get to that in a second but that I mean
b12 is just commonly fed to chickens and
you would agree with that right yeah and
and pigs and lambs would feel that can't
room and like ruminants can create b12
in their gut from the bacteria yeah okay
yeah so but you brought entitled
bivalves and
there ya know surely this ah yeah that's
not yeah totally okay so super since you
brought up cattle you said that cattle
there's no evidence of cattle being fed
b12 so if you bring up flight at forty
six vitamin b12 for sheep and cattle
it's what it says you said there's no
evidence so you said there's no evidence
so the left just so because people might
not go to read the small print well
listen there's people just listening as
well twelve injection for sheep and
cattle there's three different
processors added to feed on the left so
it says a liquid complemental
complementary feeding stuff containing a
central trace elements cobalt selenium
twelve of b12 deficient arrests let's do
two some soils and being low in cobalt
which is a lot of character so now if
you just go to slide 47 please Jamie
next slide okay this is the largest
supplier of animal feed or supplements
in the world okay on their website young
ruminants requires supplemental vitamin
b12 prior to full room and development
they also say vitamin T was sometimes
administer enter early to incoming
feedlot cattle and also b12 by the way
has been shown to increase milk
production you said there was no
evidence that cattle are given b12 and
you said that all my statements were
absolutely false do you at least admit
that you were wrong there if I said that
at all this specifically that one
portion of the statement there's no
evidence to get ever get b12 supplements
okay is it first of all when I made the
full statement this is what you first
said that's just all false that's all
just factually wrong and then later on
you said there's also zero evidence that
b12 is fed to cattle that is flat-out
wrong and I have just shown that is that
fair I was wrong okay so we'll get to
other points because you were wrong
about many other things as well ok so
let's see so you agree that um you know
it is fed to cattle so you want to look
at humans
don't say there's none of the points
that you brought up they've been giving
minerals and feet and different things
to the point if cattle are deficient
because they're in a feedlot where
they're not eating grass not only that
and that is a primary reason it is a
known war because young cows every piece
of young cows that are most likely don't
have been getting I know
meat b12 from animals do you just do you
dispute that the primary source of b12
for human beings has been eating animals
and also fish and shellfish in history
and I'm from but where's the evidence
that the rivers and streams and dirt has
been a primary source gonna be I'm gonna
give it to you okay I think I came into
debt you think I made claims in the film
that I couldn't back up perhaps we did
we went over those in the last show yes
I stick with the b12 sure okay so can we
just go to slide 48 so each health
concentration fluctuated between 100 so
this is in the levels of water in the
English Lake District if you want to go
to slide 49
the vegetables were vegetables were
eaten without being carefully washed the
strict vegetarians who did not practice
hand-washing or vegetable cleaning may
be untroubled by vitamin b12 of division
C and by the way the there are retained
vitamin D 12a soil was adequate to
prevent b12 so what you're essentially
saying is that we're dealing with b12
that was in soil and in water and that
by the chlorination and filtration
systems that we use today that's what's
ruining the water and the water does not
eat water now which is a good thing yes
but that also takes out the b12 sure so
he takes your statement correct sir he
was wrong again that's not the consensus
view that you can get enough b12 from
eating unwashed but
didn't necessarily say that was the
consensus view what he said in the
statement was that the reason why we no
longer have b-12 in the water and in the
soil is because the fact that they had
chlorines and pesticides and that seems
like there's evidence to back that so
again
now people question did I spend a
thousand hours they now that I'm giving
you the facts do you question that I
spent a thousand hours I've spent sent
another two thousand hours looking at
peer-reviewed research since then if you
say you have I don't have no reason to
disbelieve it's a lot of time it's a lot
of ten thousand hours is a lot of time
like what was it Lane Lane Norton said
that you should probably have gotten a
PhD I think well I don't think that's
the case I think there's people a lot
smarter than me that are making these
scientific Matt that amount of hours of
research I've estimated that I've done
conserved estimate I've done since then
about three thousand hours cuz once I
started making the film and during that
then I didn't anyway I believe you so
anywhere else so can i twelve analogues
in the soil that aren't absorbed and
utilized like true b12 right can we
admit the two things the things that
we've you touched on so far you you got
wrong absolutely that it's proven that
cattle do receive b12 under whatever
circumstances I don't know whether it's
because they're grass-fed or grain fed
I'm assuming they're feedlot animals
that don't get proper nutrients from
soil right don't get proper new if
you're getting these grain Feld fed
soybean fed cattle and they're just
pouring this dried-out shit into a
bucket these animals are not grazing and
they're likely deficient and a lot of
different things okay that's like this
also they've always been supplementing
their diet with mineral supplement with
vitamin E and that's the funny people
like oh well let's just take the extreme
end of a plant-based raw vegans right so
people say oh well vegans have to take a
supplement or guess what you're
supplementing anyway you're just doing
it in the regular eating that kind of
99% of the yeah whatever
so so the vast majority so well you know
people are getting it you're
supplementing you're not just somebody
b12 you don't amending D in I'm getting
it from someone who supplements it in
the feed of the animals and then you get
it that exactly
generally not if you're eating grass fed
beef not if you're eating shellfish you
loved her ass fed beef can you just
admit that you made instead about those
things b12 in the cattle and I mean
either a third point so we had the b12
in cattle you had that the use of no
average you said there was zero evidence
about that you said there was no
evidence about being able to get it from
watering and from dirt which again I
proved to be for you to be wrong and the
third thing you said I said that there's
no evidence that humans primarily got
their b12 from eating from soil and
water with no no no I didn't you miss
fret you can he's misrepresenting and
he's wrong Joe you've gotta admit but in
this case well it's clearly wrong about
b12 being given to cattle I mean we
showed it says before industrial farming
farm animals and humans could get b12 by
eating clay because of dirt on plant
foods or drinking water from rivers or
streams you don't think that people will
get the idea from hearing that that we
never needed to consume animal products
to get b12 and we don't also could we
could get plenty from eating corral so
where is the evidence for that other
than the one study that you showed there
that that's because most evidence raviga
ng's
even vegans or solder many these are
modern vegans right that's talking about
some he's going to things wrong in this
because his statement is essentially
saying that the reason why we don't get
it today is because of so the third
point you I said this you took issue
with my plan okay and up to 39 percent
of people tested including meat-eaters
are low in b12 as a result the best way
for humans to get enough b12 whether the
animal foods or not is simply take a
supplement then you said he didn't
provide a reference for that so it's
hard to check but again a contradict you
know mounds of evidence on b12
efficiency so can you bring up slide 50
please Jamie you said that I didn't
provide a reference
okay but in the bottom left where we put
all of the reference whenever I made a
claim about the scientific research
oh well it's covered by the it'll go
away in a second okay
okay allegedly yeah okay so first of all
there's the reference you claimed we
didn't have reference would you admit
that you were wrong I missed that okay
three times wrong about b12 okay so can
we just go into your study sorry your
e-book on b12 you basically said I don't
know where you got that study from your
b12 eBook opened with the exact same
study so can you put up slide 51 please
Jamie okay is that your ebook on the
left yes okay you round it up to 40 but
I kept you at 39 okay
your lives being specific b12 deficiency
is far more common than most healthcare
practitioners and the general public
realized data from the Tufts University
Framingham Offspring study suggests that
40% of people between the age of 26 and
83 have plasma b12 levels in the low
normal range range at which many
experience neurological symptoms that
was the opening statement of your b12
ebook and you claimed that where you
couldn't find the evidence of that study
I know disagreement that b12 deficiency
is an issue I talked about that on my
website that's not that's not what you
said on the last time you want rose
podcast you said I don't know you didn't
provide a reference for that so it's
hard to jack but it contradicts the
evidence if that's not reflective of the
preponderance of evidence why did you
open your ebook with it it's not right
okay so there's two different issues
here one is do omnivores get b12
deficiency right do yes they do
okay and 40 people tested in this study
which is where you reference right Chan
there are many I'm not saying this study
is bad but you say look at all of you
said I didn't provide a reference for
you did you do you write you're on
ebooks by the way I do and you don't
remember that study
no I write a lot do you know how you
have any idea how many articles I've
written over the years
all right you know do you remember every
study from every article I don't know
right trainer and that's the thing do
you not feel like I'm a combative
trainer you yourself recognize that
you're not a nutrition expert right you
said that at the beginning I'm not a
nutritionist I have master's level
training in nutrition so I mean so be 12
is 2 is that specifically me like
master's level training and nutrition
right thank you Joe
well in California acupuncturist have a
four year master's program which
includes a lot of medical sciences and
nutrition research methodology etc
because we're considered primary care
providers in the state of California so
the training is a lot different than it
is in other places so there's the
question of can omnivores develop b12
deficiency yes they can if you go and
look at the rest of the ebook it's
because of things like SIBO arranges
you'll actually set higher ranges of
what would be considered potentially
deficient right you'll say like three
four hundred might be deficient so that
would mean that even more people were
deficient right now I'm not arguing that
vegans can be more deficient in
omnivores
but can I just go to slide 52 can I go
to slide 52 so what is that what is the
question here if you're not arguing no
I'm just well physically does not be
more it's more common I'm pointing out
that you as that is what it clinically
makes the difference if someone is b12
deficient I'll get then then I think I'm
not prepared to get to that I will get
to that you said that like the four or
five claims that I made about b12 or
patently false I've already pointed out
three of the things that you got wrong
out of the five and you are the one that
like is recommending and telling people
what to eat I am a combatives trainer
and my facts in this case are this
doesn't change anything about the
factors I'm recommending nation is still
that people get enough b12 and that they
are less likely to do that on a
vegetarian and vegan diet and there's
lots of studies showing that for Canon
omnivore developed b12 deficiency
absolutely I see it
nearly all of the people that not the
vast majority no no no no I didn't say
that the vast majority of that 40% or
meat-eaters you referenced you didn't
reference the story because there are
more meat-eaters in the general
population that has nothing to do with
the fact that I'm not arguing but we've
got all of these studies about
homocysteine 9 out of 10 reviews that
have shown higher homocysteine levels
and vegans to the point that he made
last time I'll never get the rebut okay
so when you reference the Framingham
study you didn't link to the study you
link to an article from the us theory
about the study and that study said
oddly the research has found nois again
this is the opening statement of your e8
book references this study but you felt
you didn't mention this part oddly the
research has found no association
between plasma b12 levels and meat
poultry and fish intake even though
those foods supply the bulk of b12 in
the diet it's not because people aren't
eating enough meat to get that b12
Tucker said it's the vitamin isn't
getting absorbed so is that so this
backs up my claim that the safest way to
get b12 is to take a supplement now
Chris will just say so 60 can I just
finish on this point nobody can rebut
everyone so your claim was what people
can just go and get so you agree that so
um you know I would say that vegans that
don't supplement and omnivores there's a
lot more deficiency in vegans right like
it sickens it's a nutrient of concern
that vegans should be cautious all right
yeah so but that you even if you don't
accept the 40% number even though that
you said that I didn't say I didn't
accept that it doesn't matter whether
you accept it or not it like you've even
said that like we should consider higher
levels b12 division so it really made
even more but doesn't that doesn't
really matter the point is that you are
saying that rails are going in this
they're saying the vitamins not getting
absorbed in the b12 also my point was
it's safer to just take a b12 supplement
and for the general population in the
world that is the best recommendation
you'll say you can go to your doctors
and get a $60 blood test and test would
be 12 and then you can decide whether
you need a supplement or not they may
stop you guys both here why isn't it
getting absorbed
there is a higher level of vitamin b12
and fish and there's other factors that
inhibit the absorption so what are zero
is one yeah when likely vegetables
conditions but also in our growth in the
small intestine so Sojo so basically um
but we still have the data about cuz i
said the best safest way for everyone to
get b12 is to take a supplement well
right you say well you can just spend
sixty dollars and get a blood test but
you've got to recognize in the world not
everybody can afford a facility okay
so the safest way to get b12 if whether
you eat me or not is to get take a b12
supplement we know the surest way let's
just all agree on that the surest way is
the surest way for sure but then when
you've got studies that show you know
11% of omnivores have b12 depletion
versus 77% of vegetarians and 92% of
vegans you know that's with using whole
of Transco Ballymun which is a much more
sensitive marker b12 deficiency than
serum b12 which is really problematic
and then you have nine out of ten
comparisons of homocysteine that found
higher levels of homocysteine and
vegetarians and omnivores and higher
levels and vegans compared to
vegetarians and homocysteine is also
more sensitive marker than serum b12 so
there's four stages of b12 deficiency
and serum b12 will only go down out of
range in the fourth and final stage of
b12 deficiency so these other studies
that I shared on the last show we are
looking at holo Transco Ballymun which
was the most sensitive marker b12
depletion it's not technically the
deficiency at that point and then you
have homocysteine and methylmalonic acid
that are more sent less sensitive than
holo Transco bellmen but more sensitive
than serum b12 okay okay can you bring
up slide 54 please okay and I need to
show you so not only if you got all the
facts wrong so far about b12 or my
claims you said that they were all false
and they weren't false right every claim
that I made so far was backed up by
science and you have admitted that you
made mistakes okay so this is your slide
this is your slide right this is because
this is how I can show these handpicking
these studies
to make his claim you said that 92% of
vegans were deficient in let's read what
it says his b12 depletion among alamo
omnivores vegetarians and vegans vegans
now we got to remember that most people
are probably listening versus Wow sorry
yeah okay so vegans 92 percent
it says 77 vegetarians 77% and omnivores
11 percent for b12 depletion but that
study showed it was more like 40 percent
of depletion even across the board I'm
not trying to compare the two okay I'm
just trying to say your case by using
the study is that 90 percent of vegans
are deficient in b12 and omnivores an
efficient okay didn't deplete it
whatever I'm not trying to pick apart
this study I agree with this study okay
okay can you just go to the next slide
please Chris
I think it's slide 55 okay this is from
the study okay this is from 16 years ago
by the way and a very small study from
16 years ago and this is why I show you
that he's hand picking the data that he
uses and this is where I go back to the
fact that it's about the interpretation
of the totality of evidence and you
can't really rely on something that's
not a nutrition expert hand picking
studies to suit their bias so in sub
this is what it said in subjects who did
not consume vitamins the levels were
what Chris said right 11 percent in
omnivores 70 percent and so I would
agree like if you couldn't get b12
anywhere you should incorporate some
animal foods into your diet fat okay but
let's look at some other studies so
slide 56 and I'm only choosing a few I'm
sure certainly they're in my favor and
I'm not saying that vegans don't have
lower b12 levels because some people
don't supplement right but it's like you
I'm showing it you hadn't picked a study
from 16 years ago slide 56 from and this
is for a new study from 2018 with twice
the sample size of one's an eighth you
know people now know usually two b12
supplement the studied markers indicate
a generally sufficient cobalamin status
independently of the diet preferences
lacto-ovo vegetarian or vegan slide 57
now this is a study that looked at
runners in May of 2019 really current
and it feels like you might not have the
most current data because you
said to me in your email that you this
nutrition is only one part of what you
do and you have lots of other things
that you're doing right so slide 57 this
is comparing vegans vegetarians and
omnivores and these are runners
yeah and recreational educational yeah
all three groups showed an adequate
biomarker status of b12 related
parameters and then flied 58 it would be
and this one not only backs up my point
about vegans but also and plant-based
leaders but also the supplement is
better so the vitamin b12 status of
supplement users of vegans and omnivores
who is higher compared to the non
supplement users and a higher proportion
of nonstop news's had b12 parameters
outside the reference range you know
they were low so again that's more
evidence that people it's a good idea to
supplement in general because you just
have higher levels and after another
consensus recommendations after you get
over 50 you have lower engines it's a
water soluble vitamin anyway yeah but
after 50 you lose intrinsic factor so
you can't absorb as much so it's not
dangerous to have higher level so yeah
it's a good thing to supplement period
right every single thing that I said in
the b12 payment is true and backed up by
so Jamie bring on slide 59 for me if
we're looking at totality of evidence
let's look at more evidence totally but
again I'm not playing those free studies
out say there's not more I'm saying that
you hand-picked a study where vegan time
picker study James there's many studies
here in vitamins and I agree so we agree
that people on plant-based diets take
vitamin b12 actually said and we agree
that most people are getting their b12
supplement in any way just indirectly
through animals fair enough fair enough
if you follow the diet that these
animals were on which is the most and
again I would say look if you want to
eat 95 percent plants and you know how
common it is for them to supplement
animal diet would be 12 is it a rare
thing with cattle it's lower because
there's a lot of a lot but much it's not
rare
but it's lower but it's not super rare
because a lot of soil is deficient in
cobalt and cows need to consume the
cobalt to manufacture the b12 in their
in their room so it's more of a side
effect of mineral and neutral deflation
also but not for pigs and chickens and
that's what's up so vegans have higher
homocysteine levels than omnivores Donna
attempt comparisons found higher are
homocysteine levels in vegetarians and
omnivores and higher levels in vegans
and vegetarians right a blintz of hyper
homocysteine units home assistant emia
among vegetarians may actually be higher
than that among non vegetarians already
diagnosed with heart disease so that's 9
of 10 comparisons that's not handpicking
one study that's 9 out of 10 comparisons
that have been done on this topic right
and the out like you said before we
shouldn't just look at the markers we
should look at the outcomes right vegans
and vegetarians with higher homocysteine
levels do not have increased risk of
cardiovascular disease or diabetes or
death from those or from cancer I didn't
make the claim that they do we're
talking about b12 and homocysteine being
a marker right and I'm Chris I am
showing that you picked a study from
2016 which have a test very small sample
size that was ten comparisons right
there I am saying that when you came to
b12 all of the statements that I made in
the film were true and you said that
they were patently false and you were
wrong I didn't Joe come on now listen
I've come in here correct right because
I've come in here and people saying oh
what are you gonna say to that debunk
Chris did not debunk the film he made
misrepresentations about claims and he
got things factually wrong well he
certainly seems to have gotten it
factually wrong that animals
particularly cows are not given b12
supplements he certainly seems to have
gotten it factually wrong that at least
some of the b12 that people would be
able to get in the past but I got from
water and soil and the $0.40 of people
are division really well and for the
best way to get b12 is this
element so yes and every but you're
wrong
so so the thing is I have proven that he
got three or four things factually wrong
I'm every twelve right and I am a
combatives instructor okay that right
I'm just saying I'm putting myself down
I understand I'm not like a super
intelligent guy but you are so you are
very intelligent I've said that before
what you did is you did research on
these very important subjects when you
acquired a lot of data so this is what
people do when they go to school I mean
it's like the difference when is
educated and not educated is not whether
or not they go to a specific turtle it's
whether or not they absorb the
information and when they study and yeah
you said you studied a thousand hours
before the film and 3,000 cents that
you're you're obviously educated you
understand what you're talking about so
so anyway you've got things factually
wrong about 312 so to the people
listening or watching do you really want
to put the interpretation of the data in
the hands of someone that just got so
many things wrong about b12 well he got
things wrong about humor assertions
about me still stand that vegetarians
and vegans have much higher rates of b12
depletion or deficiency than omnivores
the bulk of this there's no disagreement
these are vegetarians and anyone over 50
and moat like the safest way and you're
now disputing the safest way to get b12
is to take a supplement it's the best
way to surest way to get b12 but it's
not necessary for many people right for
people that can afford blood tests which
is know most of the works like you will
live with sitting in in America in a
nice light air-conditioned room and we
know we've got cars and we drove here we
can afford to go to the doctor like the
best way to get b12 is to take a
supplement period and you're wrong if
you think otherwise if you can afford
you're sure if you can afford a around
the world that's expensive right here's
the thing if you such a diet that gives
you the ample amount of b12 and you
don't need you don't need a supplement
sure you're saying is that blood tests
are expensive so you should take an
expensive
supplement no they're not expensive v12
no it's like if you bite and bollocks
like two dollars a year but no I'm not
yeah if you're buying boo dollars a year
yeah you've got it but the trick is you
gotta like you'd have to split it with a
bunch of people because it's like year's
worth of supply but anyways right so so
no the argument is that like I said and
I've also shown it to the world I put
two bucks here if I gotta hook a lot of
people up I've also shown that in the
study that you presented in your eBook
stated that like they weren't absorbing
it as well from an employer's I'm not
saying does not be 12 in animal parts
and also we have to remember one last
thing that the b12 that our people are
getting in animal products
it was supplemented in the first place
in some indicators in the vast majority
in grass-fed Science in the vast
majority of animal products the people
are reading b12 a supplement and so I'm
just saying the safest way to get b12 is
the supplement in the vast majority sad
true yeah you think the vast majority of
people are eating wild caught fish and I
don't know how many animals are actual
chicken all of the chickens that's
chickens chickens are omnivores they're
not fed omnivorous diets run most part
unless they're free-range chickens if
you give it ever seen a chicken fuck up
a mouse it's pretty stunning yeah yeah
they're carnivorous little monsters then
chickens and when you get them and you
get those eggs and the eggs are like a
really dull yellow those are animals
reading grain only those are vegetarian
chickens that's not what they want to
eat what they want to eat his worms
they're not living in the nose though
right in their natural state little
hopping time they don't need to have
supplementation this is sort of an
argument against vegetarian diets for
chickens really because no chickens
aren't really supposed to eat that way
yeah and feedlot for beef for feedlot
either can we get the protein because I
think sure miss protein then we've like
we have plenty of time cool
okay twelve you made some excellent
points and you definitely cleared up
what was what was misrepresented right
and it's really why I really appreciate
you having me on
because that you guys did like a
three-hour debunk right and there was
just a lot of things were factually
wrong and there's more that I can point
out okay let's go I really appreciate
have me on I appreciate you being and I
really appreciate Chris and as long as
much as we disagree I really appreciate
you coming on and giving me the
opportunity and let's talk about I know
I'm getting like emotional cool so you
don't talk about protein and yes what
issues are still Sartre also just the
red meat and dairy thing outstanding -
oh whether or not red means bad for you
yeah we never really cleared that up
with protein but let's finish that okay
because we really should finish that we
can always yeah sure protein cuz I'm
sure protein is gonna be a long
discussion well I know I think it's
gonna happen here so we can talk about
red meat showing that like some of the
individual things like heme iron for
example are shown to be pro-inflammatory
and by the way just to back you up
pro-inflammatory necessarily correlated
with poor health because sometimes
things that provide information on has a
positive reaction it's an automatic
HoMedics stress and so the things like
exercise your exercise your career yeah
yeah hold me sis right right sure saw no
yeah and it's the same thing right he'll
sort of try and show that fish you know
held the TMAO for example you'll say
well how continue meal would be bad
we'll get to that we'll get that but
let's let's stick meat why things where
it meets bad for TM arrow is one of the
things okay then read me just like he
mine that I showed his inflammatory mine
is associated with cardiovascular risks
and that he mine is found in me an
eating plants in a healthy diet pattern
that offsets it absolutely that is their
evidence that eating meat by itself is
associated with cardiovascular disease
nobody ever has eaten meat by itself
what about the stories in the coal mine
there's no research on that so that's
one of my people just eating all meat
diet yeah there's not yeah I mean I mean
we both agree like let's just create a
false dichotomy first if you're if there
was a cut like all animal products fire
not just carnivore but eggs and all this
stuff and then there was a fully
plant-based diet supplement would be
twelve which one would you advocate if
false dichotomy
I'd probably check pick the plant diet
probably well although I would be
concerned about nutrient deficiencies
yeah I I've never advocated for a carton
the carnivore diet I said as much okay
class show that says something about
plants right plants are awesome right so
we agree on that
yeah he's never had anything wrong what
all he's ever said was that eliminating
all animal products from your diet is
probably not healthy unless you follow a
very strict routine when you make sure
that you have all your bases covered
nutritionally that's what Chris has said
from the job so now I I would extend
that and just say that I don't think
there's strong evidence suggesting that
including some animal products in your
Whole Foods plant-based diet is harmful
that's where we vary tremendously could
be five percent for some someone who's
just eating mostly plant-based diet and
they're eating some shellfish and organ
meats for the nutrient density or you
could have someone who eats more animal
products and depends on the person that
their needs are I go with that first
tough and the second off but just to
back up what Joe does slide 62 because I
mention this earlier but we didn't put a
slide on but I think the graphic again I
know mystery listening so if maybe Joe
you could describe it to people
differences in postprandial inflammatory
responses to a modern versus traditional
meat meal kangaroo this is kangaroo meat
versus beef Waggett Wagyu beef as I
pronounce it so so you'd recognize that
marks in CRP tnf-alpha and il-6 are
inflammatory markers yeah okay good so I
just want to point out that yeah if
you're gonna eat 90% plants and you're
gonna eat the rest of it from animal
products I think that wild-caught elk
and
kangaroo meat stuff like that would be
the way to go by far well it just makes
it just to show you like there's look at
the the that there's about half the
information roughly coming from the wild
core well that makes sense because well
most the time we're dealing with when
you're dealing with beef you're dealing
with this grain fed unhealthy animal
when you're talking about Wagyu beef
that is that's a dying animal I mean if
you saw a person who's muscle tissue
looked like a Wagyu steak you'd be like
bro you gotta get on a fucking diet you
know I mean really but if you saw like
you know an athlete if you looked at an
athlete's muscle tissue would look like
a piece of elk most likely right look
very lean and healthy right dense so
anyway I just want to point out that one
that shows a couple of things that shows
that meat does create information I
would like to see this on grass-fed meat
yeah so close to this a feedlot not even
if it matched the you know the the
kangaroo meat we're still seeing
information there mm-hmm and yeah and
certainly like you said I agree if
you're gonna eat animal foods I think
it's wise timing wise to eat a lot of
plant foods with that those animal foods
right
definitely animal foods you should eat a
lot of plants where there's also a lot
of benefits to it in terms of fiber in
terms of your mo the bio micro bad yeah
there's there's a lot of benefits to
having these fermented vegetables as
well you know things like kimchi and and
having things that provide you with good
probiotics either all these things
there's great benefit to a lot of plant
foods yeah and people on plant-based
diets I just end up getting naturally
getting more fiber most people are
deficient in fiber right if you look at
like the Paleolithic period you'd be
looking at like maybe a hundred grams of
fiber hungry and very high fiber intake
and be and plant people on plant-based
diets get more fiber than people in on
other diets as long as you're eating
healthy as we both agree hosta and peace
but just to be fair though even in
vegans and vegetarians in all of the
studies they're still getting more fiber
despite the fact that I you and I would
agree they're not eating the healthiest
diet overall
overall vegan overall completely
plant-based people are the only people
that have four within the recommended
BMI range at the most vibrant BMI range
body mass index so are you talking about
yeah
yeah but body mass that's not great it's
not a great measure a shitty one right
that's not beasts right yeah there's a
lot of nonsense I agree generally that
if if you look at people who are on a
vegetarian or vegan diet and compared
with people on the standard American
diet and they're gonna have right and
people American you take someone who's
eating healthy plates of broccoli and
kale and also has a piece of grass-fed
meat that's what I want to talk
conscious diet no I totally agree I
course you're gonna see markers like for
example the longest study on a paleo
diet right there had a two-year
follow-up and they had improved they'd
lost body fat there and improved blood
markers what was really interesting is
they were told to eliminate dairy right
so you cut out dairy they were told to
reduce their amount of or cut out
completely processed plant foods like
white flour and sugar and all this type
of stuff they were told to increase
their fruits and vegetables and they
were told to increase their meat
consumption and they got you know
improved health markers all across the
board but now now what was interesting
is at the end of the two years what they
found was that people had not stuck with
the meat recommendations so they kept
their meat recommendations the same they
got out a processed junk food right the
trans fats and stuff that you'd all
agree we should get out of our diet mmm
right they took out milk out of their
diet and they increase the amount of
plant foods so it's very clear that the
benefit did not come from increasing
meat consumption it came from increased
plant food consumption it is decreasing
bullshit right no no is a two-fold thing
right you cut out things that are
inflammatory and you put in things that
are anti-inflammatory you cut out things
that are low in antioxidants you
incorporate things that are high in
antioxidants so that was the the major
benefit it wasn't from this from
increased meat consumption who's saying
it is from increased meat consumption no
me no I'm just saying that was the
benefit of a Paleo diet
going in a more whole food plan and I
think that's what everyone says
the idea is that you eliminate processed
foods you eliminate sugar you really
limited these things that are just
filled but we know that it's not just
it's a two-fold difference when you
incorporate whole plant foods there's
the opportunity cost so you replace your
you're getting rid of crap in my
personal opinion and based on the
consensus you're replacing both highly
processed foods and animal foods and
you're incorporating more whole plant
foods and that is the scientific
consensus is see a predominately
plant-based diet you could say the same
thing about the benefits you see with
vegetarian and vegan studies comparing
with standard I agree I agree you're
removing a lot of the crap I bought
studies have you got comparing a new
travois diet to you know a whole food
plant-based diet we don't have them so
we have to infer and when we infer we
have to rely on experts that are experts
in their field right we don't we don't
turn to Chris and go okay can you tell
us more about nutrition anthropology and
neurology than all of these experts I
think I agree you shouldn't just listen
to me but I don't think it's genuine
just to suggest that there's a consensus
that a whole food plant-based diet is a
better choice than a plant-based diet
that also contains some animal products
we have no Studies on that and we
probably won't unfortunately in the near
future because right especially those
outcomes right forty years yeah they're
not good so we I agree that that's hot
like again I've said before that we
should be getting the vast majority of I
calories from whole plant foods I think
there's enough in the literature to show
and and the Academy of Nutrition and
Dietetics recognizes that completely
vegan diets are helpful for all the life
stages including for athletes I think
that there's sufficient evidence to go
hundred-percent but I'm not telling
people that they should be doing that
I'm saying if you can eat whatever they
want but I think we both agree that
people should be getting out junk food
right there's soda and trans fats I
don't by the way on trans fats so that's
you in the beginning of the show what
your position was because that's the
fundamental question for me is that is
this question that were
talking about right now right which is
is there sufficient evidence to suggest
that you know everybody most people
whatever you want to say should be on a
hundred percent or even 95 percent
plant-based diet versus a plant-based
diet that contains some animal products
and my argument all along has been no
there's not sufficient evidence either
you also think that you also think that
completely plant-based diet is likely to
be nutrient deficient and all these
other things do you know his history you
know and that's why I think that there's
I think there's emotional ties I think
you've my history is not relevant
yourself you said that I had like burst
mood and also said there people
acknowledge that there are many
successful brigands and vegan athletes
even vote the end of one and also you
didn't follow the scientific consensus
about Plan B starts when you did it so
you chose a macrobiotic diet and you
chose a raw vegan is just the rigidus
two iterations right now why did you
choose those when they weren't based on
scientific consensus cuz I wasn't this
was 20 years ago and I wasn't paying
attention to it you traveled around the
world and you got sick and you
attributed it to the diet which I may or
may not
I didn't attribute it to the diet that's
what I don't even know why we're talking
my experience because it is relevant
because it shows that like I don't know
why you were vegan or vegetarian maybe
it was for like animal rights reasons
maybe you felt bad for going back to
eating meat so now you need to feel
proved like the reason that you need to
know the reason you need the film is
because you've got a massive business
selling supplements and protein powders
and giving diet advice so after almost
does I make very very little money
selling supplements genes it's it's
basically convenience from my patients
that's understand you're saying
overweight my business is basically
training people right but then being a
clinician there's no I have I don't
profit from you know selling and like
animal product you directly because you
advise this diet so the film was very
bad for you personally because if people
believe to the film
which you know like the defense health
agency they review the film they don't
care about like this myth that we should
eat in exactly the same way as our
ancestors not the Riva you really ate
that way but they don't care about that
myth they care that what is gonna be
better for warfighter effectiveness and
to cut the health care costs of our
military so they looked at the science
independently you think they're like the
defense health agency is full of vegans
I mean so you have a film as is neither
here nor there for me but that's what
we're here for that's what the reason
that I'm here is because and the reason
that I came when Joe invited me and not
I probably tell you that I it took a few
invitations to get me here it is just to
provide the other side of the the view
here it's not because it materially
affects me in any way
believe me I've got lots of other things
as I told you in the email situation so
even like my nutrition team they spent
full time either consulting elite
athletes or military personnel or
they're digging into the research I got
chief science advisor eight hours a day
all he does is dig into the latest
research and so what you come you come
on to Joe's podcast and you're supposed
to like people are supposed to believe
that you are the best person to because
you say it's about the meta-analysis and
you say is about the totality of
evidence we agree but you're suggesting
is that people should listen to your
interpretation of the evidence when you
get things factually wrong people should
make up their own mind that we have
provided and you don't know a basic
forest plot is my point because you're
not certified and you're not yeah okay
I'm again I'm not a specialist in
nutrition like I would have liked to
have bring my I like to have brought
David our chief science advisor who
knows a hundred times more about
nutrition than either and you're coming
on here telling people what to eat
you said yourself you're not an expert
in nutrition and you don't know how to
read the nutritional data let's talk
about some of the claims okay protein
let's talk about protein oh we talked
about the film let's throw out the
protein so is that fair we should get it
right okay so can I just just so I
understand your position and I'm sorry
for getting worked up like that no
whatever like I'm like an attorney
trying to interrogate you but I feel
like
I spent a lot of time digging into
research I had the research checked in
checked and checked again I had the
research check to make sure that it was
not cherry picking that it was
reflective of the preponderance of
evidence but who was checking it were
they people who were not advocates of a
whole food plant-based diet exclusively
or were they not bull like because all
of the experts in the film are people
who are clearly aligned with this that
person and abused them because they're
aligned with the consensus and no on an
over half of them I thought you just
agreed that there is not a consensus
that a hundred percent plant-based diet
is better than a diet that includes a
lot of plans for what some animal
products so so where were the experts
that would represent that point of view
plant-based yeah I agree it doesn't have
to be a hundred percent the film said
plant-based diet I tell you why we only
interviewed vegans over the athletes
right the ones that actually spoke on
screen in Arnold is not vegan he doesn't
drink dairy thinks it's for babies and
he's cut down meat by 80 percent but all
the people I mean you know nate is not a
hundred percent vegan he's on a largely
plant-based diet eats a bit of seafood
and stuff like that but all these yeah
eggs as well so all the reason that we
only put and by the way we did interview
Loren Cordain and Rob wolf and I can get
to that as well if you want because the
anthropologist laughed in their faces
claims that you know I'm talking about
scientists who published sand these you
know who are on the team otherwise the
papers that I've shared yeah it's like
new tracks who are funded by the
industry we can get no not new true
disingenuous to claim that all of the
research that that I've shared is
industry do you want to ignore your
claim that like you know the recent
study that just came out and we were
getting off track but the recent survey
that just came out that said that red
meat and processed meat is totally fine
right like you really want to go with
that like it to me it feels like you
don't have your finger on the pulse
honestly I'm not trying to be rude I
think you probably know a lot about you
feel about that study well in the Nutri
rex study the study that said that ready
there's a new trek study okay so in the
annals of internal medicine
the day before the film came out six
studies exonerating red meat and
processed meat all from the same company
but apparently giving recommendations
well guess what exponent and nutria Rex
and companies like that are not the ones
that give public recommendations on what
people should be eating number one okay
and we talked about this in the film
with exponent nutria Rex is like another
exponent so if you look at their
recommendations first of all a Frank who
Frank who is now the chair of nutrition
Harvard he took what will its place said
the panels bring around conditions that
adults should continue to their red meat
consumption habits is highly
irresponsible Walter Willett said it's
the most egregious abuse of data he's
ever seen and if you want to follow
their recommendations if you could put
up slide 92 so they did the same thing
in 2017 for the sugar industry so there
was a meta-analysis in the annals of
each state they you mean the new
terracing so it was so Bradley Johnston
is the director and co-founder of new
Tourette's and the first author of the
paper that we're talking about for red
meat okay that just exonerated red meat
apparently and processed me so this is
the same company says that the said
President there seems to be no reliable
evidence indicating that any of the
recommended daily caloric thresholds for
sugar intake are strongly associated
with negative health effects so there
you get a meta-analysis so English don't
worry about your intake of sugar at all
that was what their meta-analysis the
collusion it came to and then two years
later the day before the cameras kept
film him out and do you really think
that's a coincidence do you think that
the so let me tell you something okay
the of our email subscribers do you know
the email address of the person that
opens and views our emails the most from
the beef checkoff program and they've
been doing that since we started
so they sign up for a mailing list they
look at when the film is coming out and
you don't you think it's a coincidence
that the day before as that film comes
out they release a paper exonerating red
meat and cancer and the same say so if
you're going to buy into the neutral
rate study about red meat and cancer
then to be fair you've also got to buy
into their conclusions about sugar
because they were paying out tell you
who they were paid by okay
so so the financial support for that
paper was funded by the technical it's
caught this now listen to this sounds
great the Technical Committee on dietary
carbohydrates of I LSI North America and
I as high as the International Life
Sciences Institute sounds pretty legit
right so it's members include coca-cola
Hershey Company Pepsi company and Red
Bull and a bunch of others folks looking
out for your best interests that should
go okay sorry
okay with problem if that was the only
you just you claimed all this recent
study and I honestly again no disrespect
you're busy with lots of other things
you run a successful business consulting
people selling stuff I get you don't
have the time you you weren't able to
read a basic forest plot to look at
statistical significance and confidence
intervals okay I just don't think that
the you're the one to interpret the data
so the reason you don't have a you you
haven't seen the hundreds of really
respected scientists that have come out
saying that this new Trek study and by
the way there's an investigation into
the annals of internal medicine because
of this for accepting this stuff from
neuter X but if you're going to accept
the meta-analysis on red meat and on
processed meat for cancer then you've
also got to accept the 2017 studies
meta-analysis you accept the source if
you accept the source the only
meta-analysis that showed no association
between red meat and heart disease or a
cancer that would be first i'm talking
about the one that you cited you made
out this is like okay say second of all
I pointed out the funding industry
funded research is four to eight times
more likely right yeah to do and going
back to that dairy one by the way do you
know that when they did their
meta-analysis they they doubled and
tripled and quadrupled up because when
they looked at when the the
meta-analysis that analyzed the meta
analyses the multimers has included the
studies multiple times you see one
saying yeah
because they took it into account each
time and so when the industry floods the
scientific research with their funded
studies again if they find a study it
doesn't their studying other studies and
and those the same conclusion adding
those on as if it's an additional
studies that we're saying no it's so
look if your industry fund studies and
an only did you decide if you're an
indie Fitness tree or dairy industry are
you going to put up studies that aren't
in your favor no right and you also you
don't have to you spin it and so what
you do is you if you want to make beef
look better if you want to exaggerate
the fat look okay or if you wanna make
cholesterol okay you can you know you
can switch things around the study to
make it look good if you want to look at
eggs and for example and I don't want to
get like it continued with free a debate
about cholesterol and saturated fat but
if you if you give if you go from 10
eggs a week to 12 eggs a week it doesn't
raise your serum cholesterol so that's
how they did the studies but if you go
from no eggs a week to one egg a week it
does increase your because there's
something called the cholesterol plateau
so what the industry does is it tricks
you it does I'm but then when you look
at eggs and outcomes like cardiovascular
disease you don't see what you do I was
just making a point that industry-funded
studies sway the results of the
meta-analysis right I think that's I
think that's fair and it's done with the
sugar industry and it's done with it was
done with tobacco and again I'm not
comparing the the amount of increased
risk of cancer from diet that was never
claimed that was made it was the
PlayBook that is used by the drug
industry by the meat industry by the
sugar you know by the sugar industry by
the dairy industry so even though your
film came out of these studies came out
right before you film it's kind of
proving your point that this same
company that tried to exonerate the
sugar industry is also if you're gonna
accept that if you're gonna cite that as
evidence and they're gonna cite that the
fact the reason I think because like you
said you're so busy on many other things
is I just don't think that your fingers
on the devil's not the only study no I
know it's not I know there's other meta
analyses 2010 15 we can look at them you
know if let's do that okay let's look at
those studies so but I don't they're
funny you know they're including studies
that are funded by industry and so
unless you can pass those out and say is
that really saying we can't rely on any
study no I didn't say that Romeo I said
that I said that that you would really
need to look at the way in which a study
is designed to see if it was viable and
you also have to replicate the studies
you know it make studies have to be
replicated and so what I'm saying is so
they said
can I just finish the last point now
like as sure as many studies as you want
because again you can show as many times
as you want you can't prove that you're
not hand picking them to suit your bias
you are the one that quoted this study
it shows that your fingers not on the
pulse because hundreds of like top
scientists have written letters or
joined in the same letter to the Al's
Internal Medicine asking for those
things to be retracted and there's now
an investigation into the annals of
internal medicine yet you are silent
radiation it doesn't prove nothing as I
was aware of that controversy and I'm
you can read forest plus the controversy
is not surprising if red meat has been
demonized for as long as it has been and
then a study comes out which exonerates
it it would be entirely expected that
there would be controversy so and do you
know who that study was funded by but
can you just pick up slide 93 just
there's just to show that any rate so
just it's not just me saying this I mean
the site you know scientists do to try
to meet guidelines didn't report past
food as you died so there because
remember most people are listening
scientists who discredited meet
guidelines didn't report pass food
industry ties the lead researcher
Bradley C Johnston said he was not
required to report his past relationship
with a powerful industry trade group
under what that trade group is but if he
scrolled down
I didn't tell you in the first one the
sugar one it was that Pepsi and always
that although they made it they make a
non-profit with a fancy sounding name
right and then they back it all with
industry funding same with the the meat
study that that's why I don't know Stan
why he'd use it if you were being
objective are you saying all these are
the other studies but why name this one
as though it's got validity because so
do you feel like they cut they concocted
this study and released it right before
your films I think it's likely that it
was tied into the background but it
doesn't matter whether it is I'm showing
that to to to present that study as
evidence when the consensus of the
scientific researchers is against that
study that is calling for an
investigation
as a spirit to been retracted the
co-author of the paper who's part of the
leadership team at nutria Rex
he's the Vance Chancellor of Dean and
agriculture and life sciences at Texas
A&M right Texas A&M is partnered with
the beef checkoff program right and as
part of neighbors and this is also
discussed in the New York Times slide 94
and there's actually there goes a lot
deeper than that it actually goes back
to Brazilian government but let you
slide 94 by defining foragers closing
about research group that discounted
risks of red meat has ties to program
partly backed by beef industry so I know
right so this doesn't necessarily mean
what they're saying is incorrect and
this is where it gets slippery right
because if they found things that happen
to be correct and they release it but
they release it from a shitty company
that has said things chose it and picked
which studies and analyses to because
you've had plenty of time just explain
this yeah
to get to your point Chris you agree
with the founding with the the
conclusion of that study and you think
that the evidence points that there's
many studies that point to the idea that
red meat is not in fact the culprit and
the culprit is when you're looking at
these epidemiology studies that you're
looking at the overall diet of these
people and asking them do they eat meat
you're not asked him what is the quality
of the food they eat yeah so I agree
that conflicts of interests are a
problem and I and you know that the
editorial that was published in Annals
alongside of this study said this is
sure to be controversial but it's based
on the most comprehensive review of the
evidence to date because that review is
inclusive those who seek to dispute it
will be hard-pressed to find appropriate
evidence so analyses had studies
covering millions of participants over
34 years there are several other
medicine analyses that have been done
over the past few years so I don't know
the best way to show these because I've
got them in a Google Doc so 2017 let's
see
if I can give you the title Danny maybe
you can google it or something
contemporary review of the relationship
between red meat consumption and
cardiovascular risk quote from that
study the review concluded quote recent
findings demonstrated that despite the
presence of heme iron and carnitine red
meat does not significantly increase
cardiovascular risk when it is assumed
and recommended doses you have 2014
meta-analysis of thirteen studies again
these are this one Jamie is called
association between total processed red
and white meat consumption all cause
cardiovascular disease heart disease
mortality and this is a good example of
what you were just saying Joe there was
a slight increased association between
red meat consumption and cardiovascular
mortality and then at the end no no
significant associations observed
between any type of meat and and heart
disease mortality results of the present
meta-analysis indicate that processed
meat consumption could increase
mortality these results should be
interpreted with caution due the high
heterogeneity observed in most of the
analyses as well as the possibility of
residual confounding meaning healthy
user bias lippi in a meta-analysis of
eleven studies of red meat consumption
and heart disease concluded the quote
the current literature data does not
support the existence of a clear
relationship between a large intake of
red meat an increased risk of myocardial
ischemia and then this is one of the
largest that was done let me give you
the title of this Jamie red and
processed meat consumption and risk of
incident coronary heart disease that
should bring it up that's by Misha at
all
conclusion consumption of processed meat
but not read mean is associated with
higher incidence of heart disease the
and diabetes these you know so there's a
bunch of meta analyses that have been
done over the years that reached the
same conclusion and we could you know
look at the same same this is for heart
disease but there are also some for
cancer so it's not just that study there
are many others right as well on the
other side so you can present studies
here so the people that's true there are
analyses on the other side right you can
present the data for the people
listening and it appears like the
proponents is that but your guidelines
for diet they're not in alignment for
saturated fat they're not in diet for
cholesterol they're not in diet for the
amount of carbohydrates for normal
people then in line with the consensus
for college athletes I've said a range
of carbohydrates could be a present all
I'm saying is you are not in alignment
with the scientific consensus and you
claim that we cherry-pick in the film
right but you handpick studies to back
up your bias not to mention that we've
pointed out that the studies in those
meta analyses some of them are heavily
funded by industry not saying you should
throw all those out but you don't have
the wherewithal to assess the studies in
the meta-analysis because you point out
yourself that you can't even read a
forest plot so he reads conclusions
right he reads conclusions in writing
but has not looked at the actual data so
you haven't been able to establish when
I was like spent the first thousand
hours I would look at the whole paper
and then I would look at each author and
I would dig into each author to see
where their funding was from and I'm
telling you that the industry is funding
studies to sway things in their favor
and you point the shows that you don't
have your fingers no doubt about that
why didn't you point to those last time
you why did you point to an industry
funded study that everyone else before
why why point out in the new direct
study you know when it was clearly
invalid the scientists way way way not
clearly invalid
it wasn't representative of a scientific
evidence they they hand-picked the
studies that were including they used
the polemic they used a grade
methodology you know what the great
method idea okay
and it was and you think that's
appropriate for assessing food rather
than for some nutrition organizations
biases in quoting well very few it's not
the scientific consensus so what is a
tional Academy of Johnny just basically
they use the methodology that wasn't
appropriate for looking at what they
were looking at it's just the same with
the Siri Torino and the Chowdhury
studies they the the the the what they
were looking for could never have been
found the association between saturated
fat and cholesterol levels it could
never been found based on the
methodology that they used but again we
still have with that we still haven't
got to protein and I so so the it's
absolutely true I've never claimed the
daren't studies showing correlating red
meat with so you show the ones that you
never have claimed that and I've said
those those studies are highly
problematic for all of the reasons that
we I've talked about on the last show
and on previous shows healthy user bias
problems with data collection food
frequency questionnaire z' relative
versus absolute risk confounding like
you know not looking at physical
activity and the biggest confounder of
all not looking at diet quality so even
the other diet quality because I know
you like to use Matt Leland's work which
has never been published which obviously
was built in what you might use
Madeline's
reaction with Jack well I'm talking
about food patterns like healthy food
pattern eating density which is a part
of diet quality you have referred to
Madeline's work we're going we can
unhappy talk about that I'm tired I'm
still talking about the the research on
read me being problematic because it
doesn't consider the overall diet path
right but again your views first of all
you don't have the wherewithal to
interpret the scientific evidence which
is very clear that you don't understand
far
plots there how can you be we you
recognize that you have to look at the
totality of evidence and you have to be
able to dig in and look at where the
things are pointing you yourself said I
am NOT an expert in nutrition and you
said again I'm not either and which is I
don't even know why we're sitting there
having this discussion honestly like we
should get some real experts in well we
could do that too and I can you know we
can you can you can point on your side
who do you think the experts are and
I'll point on our side who we think the
experts are I mean I don't even like to
say sighs really because to me it's not
really my position like I think your
position is a lot better than the
standard American diet the opposition is
really like the carnivores right well
your position yeah that's the opposite
your position though is in defense of
your film ants to his critique and how
do you think I'm doing so far well with
b12 was a homerun for sure well I think
there's lots of other things but well
the thing about we still haven't really
shown whether or not there's evidence
that is see that's the problem with all
this data and you're dealing with these
epidemiology studies you it's it's so
hard to figure out what's what I agree
what what it what are these people
eating when people are they drinking are
they doing drugs like what what is the
overall health quality base diagram
that's why you're looking so much of it
is based on the diet so that's why we
look at scientific consensus could you
just bring up slide one come on do you
agree with him where you dispute what
he's saying about scientific consensus
would you agree that you're not and
lying to scientific consensus my my
general dietary recommendations yeah
probably some aspects of it but not all
aspects but but generally I mean come on
I don't think that what do you think the
scientific consensus Chris what do you
think the scientific consensus is when
it comes to dietary recommendations well
it's changed a little bit in the past
few years definitely was low-fat
although that is changing a little bit
iris recognition of different fats
different you know may have different
effects etcetera would be limiting red
meat would be limiting saturated fat
limiting cholesterol eating a lot of
plants and Whole Foods
limiting you know limiting sugar and the
science this is scientific insight but
all that please what is that based on
what do you think that's based on that's
based on you know mostly observational
research and then some mechanistic
studies and RCTs but even RCTs if you're
comparing again like some of the studies
that are cited for example in David
Goldman's papers they're comparing a
standard American diet with a
plant-based diet so in in a random in a
crossover trial randomized trial that's
not comparing apples to apples but
anyways to get back to your question I
would say about half of what I of what I
recommend is consistent if we use the
factors that I just said eating Whole
Foods and not eating processed and
refined foods limiting sugar all of that
the areas where I differ are red meat
saturated fat but not always I think
they're that's individual and depends on
how people actually respond to saturated
fats and eggs and total fat legumes and
grains I think they're they can be part
of a healthy diet if they're well
tolerated and you do think that like the
research to trying a whole food
plant-based diet versus ten American
diet people are getting improvements on
that yeah some people I found don't do
well with grains legumes especially
people with digestive issues so you know
for them maybe not but I don't I've
never argued well that grains and
legumes are you know like I'm not a
paleo rhetoric paleo kind of advocate
and you pointed out last time I think it
was wrong to Patrick that talked about
it too hopefully I watched your podcast
and you know you pointed out about these
4matic stresses that we talked about
earlier and so you know these people
that are talking about anti nutrients
and food they're red herring right
because I don't know what they're
talking about and yeah it's it's a
really common thing and they're
basically look the landscape
of food is enormous the landscape of
dietary requirements and of health its
enormous and you know just you talking
about spending thousands and thousands
of hours combing over this research can
attest to that yeah and Chris I think
you can as well I mean we're this is a
very complicated issue and there's a
certain amount of bio of bio variability
different people have different physical
requirements different nutritional
requirements but I think we're trying to
zoom in on what is actually bad for you
and what is actually good for you I
think we agree on I think we all agree
everyone here agrees that the you you
basically need a certain amount of
vegetables in your diet you need
vitamins whether you can get those
vitamins from supplements like b12
supplements or whether you can get it
from the actual food that you eat
there's certain dietary requirements and
I think we're all in agreement on sure I
think where we disagree on is whether or
not red meat is bad for you and what
kind of red meat were talking about and
why you know why is it bad and what what
is it bad when it sits alone or is it
bad when you're eating it with
vegetables which is what we're
recommending in the first place so if
we're recommending that you eat it with
vegetables and these vegetables do have
the sort of balancing effect of the
negative aspects or the perceived
negative aspects even though there's no
evidence that those negative aspects
when eaten by itself because we don't
really have long-term but studies on
carnivore diet people so we I think
mostly we're in agreement here you're
you're defending your film rights a
bunch of claims untrue well the most
proven with the b12 issue that he said
some things that made you look like you
were saying things were inaccurate and
in my uninformed and he's done that with
a bunch of other things too though
okay and sorry you did it with protein
can I just show what the consensus
actually is on diet yes okay so can you
just bring a slide one and I mentioned
this earlier but I didn't show it so so
the World Health Organization recommends
that people eat a nutritious diet based
on a variety foods or agenting mainly
from plants rather than animals which
you said you could agree with right
because it's like not vegan
as a Saudi like maybe from plant yeah I
mean like the proportions are a question
mark there
and then the actually slide 3 would be
the FAO the Food and Agricultural
organization thing i appropriately
planned this is academy of nutrition
Dietetics okay appropriately
appropriately planned vegetarian
including vegan diets are healthful
nutritionally adequate and may provide
health benefits for the prevention and
treatment of certain diseases
that's a weird the appropriately planned
is a weird way of phrasing what it is
and it's also a little bit in fact
because it sort of it sort of it sort of
says like with you if you eat an
omnivorous diet it doesn't need to be
probably plan to do whatever the hell we
want yeah that's a good point these
diets are appropriate for all stages of
the lifecycle including pregnancy
lactation infancy childhood adolescence
older adulthood and for athletes so
these women that you hear that are
getting arrested because their babies
are malnourished because they're
following a vegan diet appropriately
planned is the key said that at the
beginning of the last of the show yeah
there I acknowledge that they're very
healthy high-performing vegans you know
people and plant-based diets right if
they do it right and there's someone to
take your advice what they have to do
that right and plan that if you probably
you got to have a plan right got a plan
to go to the grocery store yeah it's
time to get the right for there are some
nutrients that are of you know
potentially bigger concern I think that
we just show two more slides on the
proposal of evidence so a slide very
completely agree with appropriately
planned okay recognize that if you as
long as you plan it while you have b12
you get a wide variety of foods okay
it's the same one no no the slide off I
meant for omnivores too like here we go
we want people to be thinking about what
they're totally and most people are
eating a bunch of crap so here we go the
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics the
American Heart Association and the 2015
2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans
recommend appropriately planned
vegetarian diets for improved
health that that's a statement by Frank
who is the current chair of nutrition
Harvard looking at plant-based diets and
cardiovascular health and then slide to
is the FAO sorry I got the slides in the
wrong order
there's the FAO I don't know what messed
up with the doesn't look like that on my
page anyway
household should select predominantly
plant-based diets rich in a variety of
vegetables and fruits pulses and legumes
which again a lot of people on the Paleo
diet would and minimally processed are
key staple foods the evidence that such
diets will prevent or delay a
significant proportion of
non-communicable diseases is consistent
so all I'm pointing out here is that
you're not in line with the consensus of
science and that you don't have the
ability to read the papers that's why
I'm sorry I'm in line with pretty much
everything that has been shown just just
then there's only one of only one of the
paragraphs that you mentioned even
mentioned animal products and one and it
didn't recommend excluding them entirely
so so you would point out that one you
agree that predominantly plant-based is
the way to go and that as long as you
plan it appropriately vegan diets can be
helpful because say yes I agree I said
as much that vegan diets can be helpful
okay
on the first show on the first thing
show if they're appropriately planned
and I don't know
you know predominantly plant-based again
if you look at the plate and we see
mostly plants there and then animal
products then yeah it's not something
about sometimes calories I don't you
know so do you agree by calories then no
okay so you're not in the line with the
science certificates a consensus okay
I'm not in alignment with that this is
not known they're predominately getting
your calories from plants which is the
scientific consensus you're not with
saturated fat and cholesterol and a
bunch of other things heme iron but
anyway so can we get a protein because
we really here she felt like to defend
his critiques of the fence because you
know honestly I've got people that watch
the film
change their diet started feeling better
watch this podcast where he debunked the
film then called me a lot you know like
write me a message on instagrams and you
are full of shit you shouldn't read
comments
anyway I'm just saying like it's a shame
that you have someone that doesn't
really have the capability to really
understand the literature coming on here
and people buying into it talking smack
on the film where you met he made a
bunch of factually wrong comments so I
just talked about let's get in the flow
thing for sure and again I like I'm not
even the one that's qualified like if
I'm beating him on some arguments like
what do you think you would get if you
had a real nutrition expert in here I'm
not qualified like dizzy I would like to
see it okay so can I just your concerns
with the protein and just make sure I'm
understanding your argument protein
quantity and protein quality and within
protein quality it would be the amino
acid profile and the digestibility is
that fair though those are your issues
with the consideration of protein so
important we're on the same page for
what we're discussing right so I I just
don't know where and again not saying
that it's not possible to get enough
protein quantity right and quality of
and mix of amino acids in if you're
really on it right but here's well
planned just like your any other diet
was well planned I think it's less it's
less likely that you'll get protein
right on a completely vegan diet without
a diet that contains animal protein it's
more complicated it's not it's not more
complicated what it is is if you just
you don't know yeah if you don't know
what you're doing and you've been eating
in a certain way for 30 years and you
slowly take your meat off the plate and
you only eat what was left from the
plate you're gonna have a balance of
knowledge and understanding about that
is pretty low in my experience right no
I agree that's why I think people people
need more resources to make better
informed decisions about their health
about their exercise and so on I agree
what's your position on what he said
okay so you could this is I'm just
quoting you from last time now you you
really put me through a lot of hours of
extra work now it's gone from like three
thousand to like 3100 you know anyway so
there's just so much wrong with what you
said that I just had to go in to eat
every single topic but anyway so three
ounces of you said three ounces of 90%
lean ground beef do you think the animal
fat is not good for you because all of a
sudden now Chris is a so he says no no a
protein car what was the statement in
the film the film ground beef not
retaining that for protein content no no
the statement he felt was the most
common no it's not that's not actually
not a tease yeah anywhere from and
grass-fed beef which is what I advocate
okay that rights generally leaner okay
great was specifically talking about
protein cars no I know that's what we're
gonna go into right okay so doesn't I
mean the ground beef okay so basically
what I had said and I might become of
the exact words that I said but I pretty
much do as I'd record it a number of
times so one cup of cooked lentils or a
peanut butter sandwich has about as much
protein as three ounces of beef or three
large eggs that was what I said okay I
might be off in a word but that was what
I said okay I said about as much protein
okay so you go on to say three ounces of
90% lean ground beef well already what
you did is you picked Lina beef but you
know even though you don't advocate for
that you you you don't think the animal
fat is bad so what you did is you picked
the leanest beef anyway you say has 24
grams of protein I'm not sure what your
sources but he does advocate for fed
beef grass-fed beef is leaner so he's
talking about what he does advocate for
the Dylan make senses right three ounces
of ground lean meat okay but the thing
is the point in the film most people
aren't saying that most people yeah you
were saying what we said in the film
right I think you're saying regular
asian-american ground beef was much less
about what we're trying to point this
thing was not to say this is the best
foods theory or just so much in
comparison the regular stuff that you
eat like a peanut butters how much
people think no protein at all right I
think you know people think that plants
have no protein the first question you
get asked or where do you get your
protein so I said it's got about as much
protein so you so then on by the way I'd
listen to your 30-minute podcast trying
to take down the film which came out
before you
on Joe's podcast and you said that you
and you sort of backed this up I don't
know this happened like from one article
and it got spread and spread and spread
that someone said you need five
tablespoons of peanut butter to get the
same amount of protein in what world for
someone and you changed your tune a
little bit when you came on the podcast
but in when I make a bean up a sandwich
I use bread two pieces of bread how many
like you would use to lose a bread a
beautiful sandwich I think that sort of
size by definition right it's pretty
much a sure so what you did on your
podcast you admit that a tablespoon of
peanut butter is four grams right mm-hmm
okay and what is 4 times 5 20 right and
and then by per USDA how much is one
piece of whole wheat bread 4 or 5
depending on the source you look at I
agree how many pieces of bread - yeah
okay so 5 grams of protein in bread the
one that I actually have a home is 6
grams but let's take USDA ok her five
five plus five is person 10 plus 20 from
the peanut butter is 30 well even on the
leanest beef you chose it was 24 grams
why did you say you needed five
tablespoons of peanut butter and I know
how it came about because I think what
you do is you take other people's work
like Denise Miller and all these other
people you read their articles and you
take their arguments because some of the
stuff that are on your site is very
reflective of people's other arguments
on other sites so there was something
that started where people started saying
you need five tablespoons of peanut
butter and in the first article it said
without the bread now I don't know why
you don't include bread and when you
make a sandwich because I mean most
people do it's not just peanut butter
and I almost bought a peanut butter
sandwich in here today to show you what
two tablespoons of peanut butter looks
like or two and a half because the one I
had I looked at it and it was surprising
like when you actually measure a real
tablespoon it's actually not that much
peanut butter and like some I never
figured out has about like two and a
half tablespoons and two pieces of bread
my bread has like six grams butter
so my playwright's I saw about 22 grams
of protein anyway red would be more like
2 or 3 grams but no but again like we
showed a piece of whole wheat bread on
that we're
kidding eating mostly Whole Foods that's
a whole grain no one is saying we even
said in the film if we want to
cherry-pick we just try and push plants
we said white sugar and flat white flour
bad for you you're associated with
weight gain that carbohydrates from
whole food sources are insulated with
better lean body mass lower body fat
percentage and everything else but
anyway so I don't understand your math
what I think it is you took that article
because articles that spread from that
article forgot to put the bit in
parentheses about without the two pieces
of bread so you take five tablespoons of
peanut butter at 4 grams apiece that's
20 grams right which is around what
pieces of bread 10 gratis so why did 24
grams of your hand-picked lean beef
which you don't even necessarily like
there's no reason that you should be
picking that when that's not what we
showed in the film why are you comparing
24 grams to 30 grams why didn't you say
4 tablespoons of peanut butter fair
enough Mary now got it wrong again okay
so this is what it's frustrating when I
watch the show because like every five
minutes I'm hearing something that's
just factually incorrect or that's why I
hear that's why I'm here now again press
you to both of you so can we just look
at actual the breakdown of all these
different things so again the peanut
assembly is as 20 to 22 grams but that's
maybe a little bit more than there's
something the other argument was the
quality of the approach we'll get to
that but quantity for us so if you go to
bread on slide far oh I don't need to do
this you've agreed you've agreed right
okay so in length all's if you underside
eight oh no I'm sorry what you haven't
agreed on is I'm gonna say two
tablespoons of peanut butter and two
pieces of bread okay fair enough
say for a what I'm just gonna say like
the comparison roughly I mean you know
three three tablespoons sir can you just
three and a half tablespoons of peanut
butter and two pieces of bread no no no
I'm gonna I'm gonna back up what I said
in the film so I let's just go through
the slides quickly if I forget it so
slide five and apologies to all the
listeners who don't get the snip my
slide so tell them to go to youtube yeah
here we go
so what this is USDA so I don't know
what you numbers from but I went to the
USDA site unfortunately it changed in
October so it's not quite the same as
we were making the film but anyway one
slice of bread five grams of protein and
you accepted that right mm-hmm okay good
peanut butter two tablespoons eight
grams you accepted that you expect that
two tablespoons of peanut butter has 8
grams yeah
okay we could have more I have like more
but whatever okay there we go
so you agree that 18 grams of protein
for the peanut butter that's the
sandwich we showed in the film whole
wheat bread peanut butter okay so the
next slide and again I'm being very
conservative on this like in the mounts
so now I look at lentils one cup
seventeen point nine grams of protein
that is USDA again would you accept that
on the left side one I accept yes here
is absolutely okay but you accept USDA
when it comes to this but not in terms
of recommendations we're talking about
yeah if we're talking about quantity of
your accepting' micro this is something
that's been clearly measured this is not
something like recommendations okay sure
so but we're on the same page we're
taking this as a soap okay so now if we
go to slide it's nine sorry the one that
you just had the one with here we go
so three eggs 18 grams of protein would
you say so far we've got about as much
protein in the peanut butter sandwich
with two tablespoons not the five that
you can it's less I mean 18 is not 24 no
no no I don't say I'm getting to the
beef I'm saying so far what I have
presented just the two tablespoons of
peanut butter and it's came to 18 I was
really conservative right I could have
put more peanut I could have had bread
that had more like the one I don't want
in the brand
okay but you do admit that you can get
bread that's got 6 grams of protein sure
ok so I'm being really conservative just
that sort of prove a point but you so
far we've had a peanut butter sandwich
with only two tablespoons of peanut
butter and when it seriously you try
that at home Joe like actually measure
it with a measuring yeah well I talked
about in the park yeah so I'll probably
have about five
okay so anyway I probably would too
three large egg three large eggs okay so
the 18 grams and I'll go to organic this
is organic ground beef standard organic
Brown v the answers so three ounces is
seventeen point five grams if you want
to if you want to get into it you can
get into like because let's put 100
grams so I can if you what's the fat
percentage nine point two grams so it's
half no it's no no sorry it's nine point
two grams per hundred grams so you we
had to do the calculation oh but that
mmm okay but this is the regular organic
ground beef in the neighborhood of and
then what to be sex I knew you'd bring
up a grass-fed beef so that I found the
lowest and the highest okay okay so go
to grass-fed beef slide eleven three
ounces this is on the very low end so
this is probably the fattiest meat but
you wouldn't be against animal fat right
not typically depends on the person and
there's I just talked about person there
anyway well Louis fourteen point four on
the highest end I actually think my
number eighteen grams
okay so Pia butter sandwich 18 grams
lentils seventeen point nine can we
round it up yeah
three eggs 18 grams okay three ounces of
beef 18 grams at best 90% lean you can
have more protein no doubt so you can
find protein that's got higher I said
about I was trying to show that dispel
the myth that you you know plants have
no protein and animal foods have all
this protein so I've just shown you
there now your second point was that the
problem with his second point was a
problem with a peanut butter sandwich to
get 18 grams of protein and I think this
is a fair point you would have to eat
for 410 calories right so if you go to
slide it's actually the more important
point because I'm not necessarily you
know that may not be a problem for
somebody who's training no no
yes or no no quantity can we finish can
we finish coffee first so so can you
like bring up slide 15 so you admit that
you can get like a decent amount of
protein your argument was you can get
like percentage so slide 15
there are lentils for 18 grams of
protein again if you want to check this
calculation and stop at anything I'm
fine I have had this triple checked okay
18 grams of protein 231 calories okay
because you like points no I love that
people like to point out the beef and
then the peanut butter sandwich and try
and compare those even though we were
right on the protein now you're trying
to pick on the calories so you didn't
pick the lentils which have 231 calories
the next one slide 16 has which is about
the same for beef which is about 210
calories grass-fed beef in the first
instance grass-fed beef in the first in
slide 17 275 calories and that was on
the lot the one that wasn't so lean and
70% lean beef and I'm just pointing out
there's different ranges 417 cows for 18
grams of protein right so fatty meat
which you don't think that like the
animal fat is bad right he's talking
about the protein percentage there was
less in my opinion there was more
protein percentage-wise in my peanut
butter sandwich than there was in the in
the green peep and then the last no not
the last one yeah we could have picked
something with less calories so if we
pick tempeh for example slide 19 170
calories so again would you say but I
think his argument was no the the the
argument was the quality of the program
there was too much apart yeah the part
of it was you would have to consume more
calories okay but just before can I just
one point yeah so the first part was you
can't like you can't there's no a near
as much protein and then there was like
always based on the calories so the
percentage of protein is you would have
to have more calories to get the same
amount of protein which is not program
we don't have to laughter okay so he
made a mistake again it was not a
central part of my art
and the quantity was broken down to two
things you just can't get as much for
like you know song as much in that
serving they're totally wrong you that
have five tablespoons of peanut butter
totally wrong I agree
right thank you okay and then you also
said that you have to have so many
calories that you couldn't get it and
you were wrong again agree for the
peanut butter sandwich or just in
general just in general from plant foods
lentils coming at slide twenty sweet
potato and leek omelet from Chris's site
where the protein is going so this is
from your site 18 grams of protein 410
calories the funny thing is I typed in
recipes and I think it was either first
or second came up the all I do is pick
the first two high protein recipes from
your site because I didn't pick the soup
or the salad so that'd be unfair so I
picked the first couple so sweet potato
and leek omelet cut the protein coming
from eggs 18 grams of protein for intent
guys do you have an issue with your own
meal no so do you have an issue with the
peanut butter sandwich having 410
calories yeah okay that wasn't central
to my point there was not the same
quantity which is not what you just
admitted it's not quality which is yes
score we're get the deer score in a
minute and I will show that you were
wrong again
so Terrell and bacon hash slide 21 18
grams of protein 570 calories if you
want to go to your breakfast of
champions which I thought you know for
athletes slide 22 and by the way I took
your date I didn't at USDA I assumed
that you were not lying
so I took the the totals from the bottom
and but I standardized it for 18 grams
of protein because we're just comparing
everything percentage-wise 688 calories
do you think that people should not eat
that meal yeah it depends on who you're
talking about but but slow down slow
it's a low protein right I don't think
that people shouldn't so first of all
it's low protein by like most people
standards but your standards of protein
are much higher so that would be far off
so that would mean to make
for the rest of the day you would have
to have meals that were like almost just
protein or maybe they'd have to buy the
protein powder from your website in
order to make that up anyway
so let's move on to now the by the way
slide 23 largest study ever done
comparing completely plant-based leaders
with extent study showing plant eaters
versus me 75 grams a day that was the
average aren't you supposed to have one
gram per body weight per pound of body
weight no that's the upper end for
athletes okay so this is this is how
much they're actually getting the
largest study ever done comparing
plumpie theaters so you can see it's
about the same and actually per pound of
lean body mass fat free mass the vegans
were getting slightly more because they
had better body mass index they were
slightly leaner but anyway I just want
to say it's roughly similar so your next
argument was that athletes need more
protein it's like right I know it wasn't
an argument because you admitted that I
pointed it out in the show yeah so if
you go to slide 20 you know 24 I just
want to point to talking about the
amount that we're actually reporting
we're going into the amount now we're
still we're in um yeah we're in amount
for athletes because this point there's
like maybe you can get enough to survive
but not to be an athlete so I'm gonna
look I just think that was this point I
think his point was there's a different
requirement oh no no no no for athletes
yeah survive we won't argue on this
point your point is you need more his
recommendations though what he does is
he pushes them to a really high end that
isn't consensus showing that then trying
to make it out that it'd be harder to
get which we've already shown you can
get enough protein for you know of
course and athletes more calories
therefore they get more protein as a
percentage so I just want to check sure
two positions on this and then we can
see if you again you don't agree with
the consensus of science so this is the
joint position paper of the Academy of
Nutrition and Dietetics the dieticians
for Canada and the American College of
Sports Medicine so this is for athletes
okay this is just one I'm going to show
you another in a second do you want to
read it out Joker's sure we might get
bored of my voice Teradata see suggest
the dietary protein intake necessary to
support metabolic adaptation repair
remodeling and for protein turnover
generally ranges from one point two to
two point
zero grams or kilograms per day okay and
then the next slide Jamie if you could
bring up like I have I agree with that
and have it in my okay so on the same
page okay supplementation beyond a total
daily protein intake of 1.2 grams
kilograms day wait is it wrong one why
we where are you reading that from the
big square - no I said 1.6 okay no you
said 1.2 82 grams you read from the last
thing did I really do that
that's pretty Genie that doesn't make
any sense okay so this is what wasn't on
amiright read again yeah okay I thought
I've read it's 1.6 I didn't that's what
you read your won't wait six oh maybe I
thought you said one more to the tail no
no protein supplementation beyond a
total daily protein intake of 1.6 that
the squiggle means about oh okay about
1.6 grams kilograms a day during our et
sistent exercise training provided no
further benefit on gains in muscle mass
or strength and these like really highly
and and if you look at the and I'll I'm
so complex that kilogram a kilograms to
pounds of body weight you're going to
2.2 so we're 1.6 grams so it's it's
point seven two seven two seven two
grams per pound people so you're looking
at about three-quarters of a gram per
pound recommended anything over that
provided no games I want to clarify so
you can see the the two-phase breakpoint
analysis on the top right this chart yes
okay so you can see that you can see as
the chart goes up and then it flattens
out there was no further gains in fat
free mass which is the y-axis and after
one point set however there's a constant
called a confidence interval like how
confident are they that these findings
are correct and it was a very wide
confidence vote so it actually took it
there was six grams either side so it
was actually up to 2.2 and down as low
as 1 mmm so it's one to two point to the
other one the Academy nutrition
nutrition and dietetics and the Academy
of sports medicine one point two to two
so the widest range is 1 to 2 point 2 so
some so you think that this like
recommendation that's a standard thing
that you hear in a gym one gram compound
of but it's probably just
that's a gerund so 2.2 grams on the
upper end the 2.2 grams per per kilogram
of body weight per day is one gram per
pound of body so no doubt and this is
what you're talking about certain
athletes like bodybuilders trend
athletes but a confidence interval means
to apply to everybody some people could
actually build optimum and this is about
optimally building muscle as fast as
possible right and some people could do
a 1 gram some people might do point to
but like readily it would like 1.6 1.8
like the scientific consensus that and
you said you agree with these ranges of
the science and there's some evidence
suggesting that higher amounts may be
beneficial so if you go to or Jamie if
you search for examined calm how much
protein do you need there's an article
there and examine calm is a do you know
about about them so I know you're on a
panel of scientists or a group of
scientists a group of scientists right
not the American Sports Medicine the
indicator an indicator amino acid
oxidation method which was newer if you
scroll down Jamie to the optimal daily
protein intake for athletes and
similarly active adults or if you just
click on that you see in that paragraph
I a steady xand athletes found different
numbers because for of the 49 studies in
the meta-analysis meta-analysis that had
that range lower range were conducted in
people with resistance training
experience the other 45 were newbies I a
different numbers female athletes
required 1.4 to 1.7 meal endurance 2.1
and 2.7 a mature male bodybuilders this
seems the same point this is the average
amount of protease probably get some
higher one maximize lean mass is about
1.6 grams per kilogram it's the same
exact your it's like totally accepted in
sports world like whatever it's also
says some people need upwards of 2.2
grams per kilogram for those interested
in comprehensive breakdown it provides
another link range we're not a far off
it says regular training some male
endurance athletes require 2.1 to 2.7
grams per kilogram so that's the high
range yeah and so and you could you do
say something about 2.8 is 3.3 and 1
remember in one study you pointed out
that was just doesn't actually help you
build more muscle mass but if you're
trying to lean out yeah and also I think
some of the studies that you've looked
at that look at like there's one at 2.3
I've actually got it on my computer I
don't have in my slides but there's one
at 2.1 23.3 you've got a Moute there's
two things about that one it's when
you're in a caloric deficit because if
gluconeogenesis you pull some of the
protein and you crit you know you use
some of the energy so there's less
protein less for building so if you're a
bodybuilder cutting for competition
trying to get down to like four or five
percent then your protein requirements
go up above that still more range
because you're basically using deficits
you're using some point for fuel and
that's also the case with those
carnivore people and a lot of keto
people as well right yeah and they
probably adapt some because like normal
people you can actually only during
exercise you can only get 10% of your
energy from the oxidation of protein
into glucose but so the where are we
going so the two point three to three
point one by the way it's one in caloric
deficit and it's - based on fat free
mass qualifications it's not based on
total body weight which is what all the
recommendations are on so the the two
point three to three point one in some
of these studies if you did like okay if
someone's 50% body fat right I would
bring it down right there wouldn't be
two point three to three point one based
on math so if you're 200 pounds and
you've got 20% body fat you only weigh
160 pounds for this calculation got it
anyway where we have so you'd like to
talk about the IAR in terms of these
recommendations and if you were to slide
102 Jeremy how am i doing by the way
defending in the film excellent you're
really doing really well good not bad
for a dumb old UFC fighter right you're
not that old 41 how much proteins can
the body use in a single meal for muscle
building implications for daily protein
distribution showed up were of see one
of two point two grams for kilograms a
day and cohort of young
body builders all of the method of
assessment indicator amino acid
oxidation technique used in this study
has not received universal acceptance
for determining optimal proteins for arm
and so it's in that same range so I'm
not yeah but I mean the couple things
I'm not trying to point out that your
ILO is off I'm saying if you want to
take your iro the indicator amino acid
oxidation index if you want to use that
then the upper confidence still is still
2.2 so the scientific consensus I just
want to make it very clear that you
throw out a bunch of these numbers on
high protein making out the vegans
couldn't hit that level
first of all I've shown that foods can
get that I've shown that vegans can get
sufficient protein and I've shown that
I've shown the levels that the
scientific consensus on the protein
ranges for athletes and not inside the
consensus with these three point three
but even if they were there's no reason
you couldn't get it on a plant-based I
didn't argue that everyone should be
eating three point three grams enough
protein and you were wrong I didn't say
they couldn't get enough I said that
it's less likely that they will get it
but it's not like some of those recipes
on your website the beginning less so
you're being disingenuous Chris like the
first recipe was there was sweet
potatoes right was it no it was a it was
a second one oh it was a leek omelet it
was a different bacon hash and then it
was breakfast of champions with milk
yogurt and eggs so all I'm saying is
people that watch the last episode where
he was bashing the film people walked
away thinking you can't get enough
protein and then they thought the
quality is not good enough and now we
can get into that let's get into that
let's get into that because this is the
crux of it right yes it's like you can
get all the acid content if I throw to
first of all b12 as an argument
smash that protein is the next argument
I've just smashed the protein caught
quantity argument and now we'll get into
the program
we certainly smash the protein quantity
versus caloric intake right and so it's
fair to say is it fair to say that based
on what I've presented you can get about
as much protein from the things that I
said well based on what you presented
you haven't lost an argument yet there's
not one thing that you've said that that
thank you
that's incorrect and I even agree if
you're gonna eat some meat should be
some help
you wanted yourself
so let's get into the love of us I was
like really like doing like researching
for this I really enjoyed it
because there were so many flaws that I
was just like I I love I was a true
seeker
right so ice went for the search of the
truth in combat you know Bruce Lee would
say research your own experience absorb
what is useful reject what is useless
add what is specifically your own I
don't care about all the the George
Dillman you know BS about you can knock
people out I don't care about that I
don't care about all these traditional
styles of martial arts I care about what
is the truth before I did this you know
I thought oh yeah paleo it makes sense
I actually switch to grass-fed beef with
because the omega-6 made of three ratios
I started eating our chilled chicken but
then I read the research and I wasn't
biased by like anything other than
finding out the truth between the
optimal diet for health and athletic
performance and recovery my injuries and
that is the truth and that is what I
have done and now we're going to expose
how you were incorrect about the protein
quality so you said what's a little
disingenuous about the film they said
every plant has every amino acid well
yeah nobody disagrees with that but it
does have does it have enough of each of
them well first of all people do
disagree with that but if you want to
search there's you know plants of
missing amino acids people think that
it's missing some of the nine essential
amino acids so that's why we put that in
the film okay and we did and I said you
left off part of my coil I said every
plant has every amino acid that's what
you said but you left off the end of my
quote which said every plant has every
amino acid in varying proportions that
is what I said and you left out the in
varying proportions which again I think
is disingenuous he did not complete my
quote you hand-picked part of my quote
to represent your view so people number
one do think that plants a complete
limit so a lot of people think just like
you know that people are this article
saying when no one thinks that protein
gives them energy I've got five studies
here the only five sites that I could
find on the knowledge of collegiate
athletes and around 50% in each of the
studies think that protein is what gives
you energy
so people were saying like why did you
put that in the film that's a straw man
people don't think the protein gives the
energy about 50% of collegiate athletes
think that protein gives you energy
that's why I dressed in the film anyway
back to you like the DIA is right the
digestible indispensable amino acid
school or the pdcaas which preceded it
yeah either of those right so can you
just mention why you like it and you
know what the benefits are and how it's
the term how is it determined so the
benef the Daas takes into consideration
amino acid profile and bioavailability
okay and how is how das did not take
into consideration I looked at crude
protein to the total amount of protein
absorption not the individual amino
acids because different comido in
different amine different individual
amino acids absorb differently so that
was a one of the benefits of the DES
scoring record the S&P dks or whatever
so but how is it determined press you
know how it's determined the DF yeah I
don't know the details so I'm sorry I'm
sorry it's like it's just it's like it's
almost like comedy that someone is
talking about these systems that does
not know how a so slide 27 and I'll tell
you one of the benefits of the di is so
and I think you might have mentioned
this I think you might know more than
you're letting on so one of the benefits
is the auro ileal digestibility so the
pdcaas right that took the whole
digestive tract to what came out will
end are we looking at here so look at
this so this is how the dia s is brought
about so basically passed the ileum you
can't a digest your body doesn't absorb
the protein really it's digested by the
bacteria right so this is one of the
benefits of the dia s versus the pdcaas
right the old system is that they saw
how much protein went through the whole
digestive tract but that wasn't
reasonable right because you passed the
ileum you're not digesting the protein
the bacteria dress thing and you're not
getting it and that makes sense yes so
basically they put a pore in the pig now
pdcaas was mostly in rats and this is
that in rats and there's some in humans
but it's mostly done in pigs because
it's a more similar digestibility to
humans and they basically assessing how
much of that protein was absorbed right
and how much of the amino acids were
absorbed now somebody will make the
argument even the FAO point out the
flaws something
make the argument well pigs have a
different digestibility rate which is
true and they have a different amino
acid profile requirement different so
some people would say that for dears
bunch of crap right I'm not going to
make the argument even though it's
telling you know it's taken animals
primarily not in humans they've got a
different amino acid requirement and
different digestibility capability okay
so I mean would you think of that score
is the best one to use with humans it
doesn't make sense right but I'm not
gonna even make that argument I'm gonna
go with you and say okay des is the best
thing out there okay okay so even though
you can question it so you've said this
is a quote from the last time when you
were trying to bash the film it's all
about protein quality and this as you
said is an established science a firmly
established science he was talking to
you obviously and you must have said it
was established they look at this
especially in like third world countries
where protein deficiency is common so
they try to figure out how to address
this okay now the FAO the Food and
Agricultural organization of the United
Nations what is their purpose correct to
prevent nutrient deficiency thank you
very much yeah so honey I've got a slide
if you want to prove but it's basically
defeating hunger providing food security
not for America or for England but for
like the nation you know the the like
130 more 130 countries right where
people are starving malnutrition that is
their purpose so you've got to look at
it through the lens of that so if you
just work slide 29 because I just want
to bring back these claims up I know the
slides are getting kind of boring I
again apologize to people just listening
focusing on protein malnutrition was
largely conducted after the
identification of course your core core
core core and the realization that many
children globally are suffering from the
subclinical protein malnutrition to
address protein malnutrition the
composition and digestibility of
proteins must be determined okay so we
go to the next slide and this is by red
that was looking at the DS score you
know you can see at the top can indict
di score decrease protein Melanesian
then be going to say dirty or food and
agricultural organization of the United
Nations has developed methods to
evaluate the protein quality of food
food items and in 2011 the digestible
indispensable amino acids Cordy IaaS was
recommended as a successor to the
preview their previous method okay so
we're not in a disagreement right now
I'm even gonna forego like I'm not gonna
argue about the animal having different
amino acid quirements or even though
that's like that's pretty funny right
like why are you assessing anyway so I'm
not gonna have that argument what I'm
gonna have is I'm gonna go with
everything so far
FAO they're endorsing you're over the
PDS a lot of experts endorsing over the
is okay over the PD cast okay so now in
slide 31 it's made for starving children
okay mmm-hmm this is what it's made for
so I would agree if you're in a caloric
deficit and you're in a country where
there's very little protein and you're
only getting 30 grams of protein a day
let's just say that the animal like take
the animal stuff out of it and like the
way that the method is flawed over to
the FAO points out yeah so let's just
say it's legit
I would agree I would say get your
protein from meat I would agree because
that's what it was designed for as you
can see in looking at our post exercise
skeletal muscle the DIA s does not
attempt to consider how scores translate
into optimizing more downstream
physiological targets of interest to a
physically active personal athlete so it
wasn't designed for that system it was
designed for starving people in
countries where they were not getting
enough protein and they weren't getting
enough protein as you would call high
quality okay so so would you recognize
that it wasn't developed for that system
yes based on the scientific literature
but you're inferring it now for the
amount that I still think it's a
relevant measure of protein quality
because it is a Mino acid profile and
allele digestibility yeah it is
I'm starving country when people are
starving I agree but as you can see it's
looking it's still looking at amino acid
profile right do you concede that it's
looking at the at the relative content
of amino acids in a particular food yes
and it's looking at the ileal
digestibility which i think is an
improvement over the I think it's got
elements even though they
fair's point out his flaws and ten years
from now we'll have a better system
right but right would you agree probably
plenty now probably ever better since
imagine okay but it's the best that it
can kind of go of but again it looks at
and it's not just my opinion that it's
not used for that this is like in sports
medicine 2019 and I agree you're busy
with other stuff you probably haven't
seen this article that came out and
they'll in February right have you seen
this article I have not seen together
ethically so so basically can you look
at the now in the 2018 Journal of
International Sports of Sports Nutrition
slide 32 society of sports nutrition
because you like to say it's all about
muscle protein synthesis right that's an
important factor okay it has been
proposed that muscle muscle protein
synthesis is maximized in young adults
with an intake of 20 25 grams of high
quality protein about this grand about
about 20 25 grams of a high quality
process high quality protein okay do you
disagree that like eating four or five
times a day at a twenty to twenty five
grams of high quality protein whey be
whatever you want to take tie score
whatever under your you know the scoring
system you agree with do you agree that
that is the amount to maximize opposed
when it shows that that does for a
four-hour window acute muscle proteins
is this yeah most of the sports
organizations suggest that for acute
protein right intake but if you now I
again I'm going with the consensus so if
you take that twenty to twenty-five
times four or five times a day multiply
that what is that that's eighty two
hundred hundred hundred twenty grams of
protein today is that is that enough for
a big athlete proteins in fact is that
enough for like a 250-pound athlete I
would say no so I'm not I'm not saying
that I do I think you need more protein
than that right
so muscle protein synthesis is only one
factor right can you tell me what the
other factors are tissue regeneration
and repair recovery right yeah yeah okay
so I think we're on there on the same
page that twenty twenty-five grams has
basically been shown in a single sitting
over a four-hour window in what we call
a cute short term that's been shown to
maximize muscle proteins in this and
that is because twenty
and it's been shown actually can get
less with like egg you could get like 17
grams or something but it's basically or
hitting two things you're hitting
leucine you're getting one point eight
to two point one point eight to two
grams of leucine which is basically like
a foreman right it's like telling the
others like hey you should build protein
if you don't have any leucine and if you
had all the essential amino acids you
want except for leucine you wouldn't
have the form and telling all the
workers to like build the muscle
basically that's what leucine is so
you're getting enough leucine and you're
getting eight to ten grams of essential
amino acids that is what is important in
the acute stage of muscle proteins is
this you're getting 18 grams of and we
can get more granular and like it's you
know point zero grams per pound of body
weight but it's this is basically
accepted and in fact they've shown that
like even if you're 400 pounds
you know you probably you play don't
need even more than 20 25 grams for some
reason there's something in that number
about getting the leucine amount doesn't
really matter how big you are you know
there's a small percentage all that say
you might need a bit more 2.5 or
whatever but consensus is this 20 25
grams and I'm sorry this is like long
but it's like it's important to like
burn it down okay so so by the way just
going back to your deer scoring you're
basically looking at like a rules for
jiu-jitsu don't like a DJ Jitsu
tournament and you're trying to apply
them to MMA so just because jiu-jitsu is
involved in MMA it doesn't mean that a
scoring system for for like IBJJF or
whatever that doesn't mean that that's
the best scoring system for MMA right
sure yeah you could get points for like
ya know whatever okay so essentially and
this isn't just my opinion okay this is
scientific literature not an article
that you just pulled on is amacom but
that's not how science works you do is
pull up an article so slide 33 and it's
very clear this is just very obvious
it's not it can't it cannot just be
about short term acute muscle protein
synthesis right it can't be because you
wouldn't be hitting the 1.6 the 2.2 so
this states my cute anabolic responses
are not necessarily associated with long
term muscular gains the topic can only
be answered by assessing the results of
longitudinal studies that directly
measure changes in lean mass with the
provision of varying protein dosages
okay so you agree that it's not just
about short-term as both losers okay
so what it is Joe it doesn't matter at a
certain point it doesn't matter because
yeah if let's say you're gonna have four
times a day unless so you can have a
hundred sixty grams of protein and you
have forty grams right of protein four
times a day that's 160 grams so if
you're gonna optimize muscle mass and by
the way like how much how much much all
have you put on in the last 15 years no
I'm not sure man I put none right
basically I'm about the same right but
anyway let's just say that you're a
bodybuilder and you and we told you
about a stack are you trying to stack on
as much muscle as possible because it's
like even like when I get like I'm like
190 193 maybe sometimes like if I go
over 200 I just feel slow I feel slow
with the handgun I feel like I just feel
slower punching like whatever so it's
not everyone's goal is to optimize mass
or mass as quickly as possible right but
let's say that your goal is right
clearly it's not enough to do that you
have to hit the 1.6 to 2.2 grams right
right once you hit that amount you have
to do two things you have to hit the
muscle the the short-term leucine
threshold and amino acid in the short
term right and then you have to hit the
so what you have to do two things you
have to maximize the muscle pose
instances in the short term and you have
to get enough protein during the day
right at one point six to two point two
is that fair okay so once you hit the
one point six to two point two let's say
you have 40 grams it doesn't matter you
follow me you even quoted doesn't matter
the amino acid profile the food as
always no because as long as you hit the
essential amino acid amount and the
leucine amount in the 14 you can hit the
leucine amount and the amino acid amount
in virtually all of these vegan forms of
protein is that what you're saying no no
if you're having like first of all you
could do it with like if you do beans
rice and vegetables yeah you'd hit two
grams of protein for like 500 70
calories
now again you could like you know that
most athletes supplement right yes like
I can got slides if you want for
scientific proof but you would accept
their like elite athletes even more so
over percent
suffering with protein powder anyway
they stop reminding you with brush and
amino acids because it contains leucine
isoleucine is what are you over 50% are
supplementing with protein powder and a
higher percentage at least just athletes
period yeah okay even more it's probably
if your goal is to like do something and
like take creatine or you know a protein
or like you know these athletic
endeavors like you pointed out the thing
that Patrick does and we can get into
the right by the way the
misrepresentation of from Robert Hurst
of us into his you know Patrick's
records if you want because there was a
lot of claims that were made that were
completely false again so basically if
you get enough protein if you hit one of
the windows if you hit the 1.6 to 2.2
with plant protein you can hit the
muscle protein synthesis and like all of
a sudden he's like I'm saying there's no
benefit in animal protein for an amino
acid profile versus plant protein no no
not if you're getting enough protein so
you're saying if you're getting enough
protein as you have acknowledged of the
rate ratio of plant proteins no no no
it's pretty it's not difficult at all
I'm talking about leucine if you were
like if you were really messing up and
eating like people just don't eat
healthy you might not get enough leucine
but like if you're planning to become as
big and as strong as possible and you're
dead do you need a specific workout plan
but this is only assuming that you're
taking supplements or is everyone's
taking so chief no no no no you can do
it with supplements you're not seeing
the people are taking supplements but
you can do it but are you assuming that
people are taking supplements no you can
do it on a whole food diet plan with
with just food with b12 like right a
supplement b12 nothing else you can
achieve the same amino acid profile as
me yeah I mean I want to touch on that
I'm not saying that the only that is the
argument but I just want to throw people
off like depending on where you live you
might want to suffer a vitamin d based
on you have Sun I just wanted like don't
I like try everybody should do that
anyway and it particularly d3 okay so
what I'm saying is as long as you get
that amount of protein and
if you're eating if you're exercising to
optimally build muscle you're exercising
a fair bit right yes you're burning more
calories right right so you eat more
calories and I don't think I don't know
where my sliders we're deep into the
woods here and this is getting really
good the question was but it's this is
what with his assertion was that the
amino acid profile of meat is superior
in context it's important when you look
at the FAO and the goals that they're
doing to try and stop world hunger it is
no important in the Western world number
one and not important if you're an
athlete and hitting the rep but you're
getting between one point six to two
point grams per kilogram so what you're
saying is that as long as you're getting
this one point six to two point two
grams per kilogram yeah of protein
whether it's lentils or peanut butter or
that you have enough amino acids to
achieve the desired results
no and it's essentially the exact same
as if you're hitting that 2.2 grams
grams it doesn't matter
do you think that's true if you're
getting 2.2 grams of protein and you're
doing it and you're not doing it in the
way that you said where you're not
planning it and not getting making sure
you're getting enough leucine which is
you wouldn't have to try I agree but
there's a certain quantity that you will
achieve there's a plateau so it doesn't
matter once you've got that amount right
other point that you had about protein
quality is by jest ability so that's the
last point that I want to address okay
how am i doing good ok so slide 34
because you basically claim that ok even
if there were enough amino acids you
can't digest it as well
more precise data collected the more
precise data collected so far in humans
assessing real specific oral allele
nitrogen digestibility has shown that
the differences in the digestibility
between plant and animal protein sources
are only a few percent contrary to
historical findings in rats or
determinations using less precise
methods in humans and just so you know I
understand that you haven't seen this
probably the
it just came out last month published by
Stanford so I get you haven't seen now I
take this one step further
there's only at most like two or three
percent different and digestive plant
protein and you know how its assessed in
the pigs they give them raw food so they
give raw beans raw grains and you have
said one of the reasons that it's less
digestible is because of trypsin
inhibitors yeah and when you cook you
would definitely break them down mm-hmm
are you getting it so when you when you
heat food the likelihood is you know it
hasn't been tested we know that the
digestibility is less in plants by a few
percent only a few percent not the forty
percent versus a hundred percent that he
was claiming last time
that's old science I'm talking about
current science right and there's only a
few percent difference and they imagine
that not only if you heated it but you
would guess equivalent you might even
get more because you're killing the
trypsin inhibitors by heating it so that
whole nonsense about the the quantity
you were wrong the quality the GI score
was not designed for that it doesn't
matter when you get enough protein so as
long as you get enough protein you're
using measures for a organization that
is looking at hunger I am we're talking
about if people have got enough I agree
if you're in like a developing country
and you have very little diversity of
plant foods and maybe not enough in this
manuals you should be eating the animals
I agree but that is not what it is
designed for and it doesn't matter the
amino acid profile doesn't matter and
the digest meat doesn't matter when you
get enough protein let me pause you
first from here because you've been
going on for a long time yes amazing
points Chris this has not been that good
for your arguments so what are your
thoughts on what he said so far and what
are your thoughts on what he's refuted
about what you had asserted about his
show I think he's made some good points
and you know my original argument and
what we started out talking about was so
you take the the film and the claims of
the film the specific claims of the film
and then you also take the the question
and we start
talking about which was is there
evidence that a hundred percent
plant-based diet is better than a diet
that contains animal foods that's really
and for the protein come on and there
was a lot of claim there were a lot of
claims in the film that we talked about
about you know dairy products causing
cancer dairy products contributing to
cardiovascular disease chicken and fish
causing cancer red meat clogging the
arteries that we address and haven't had
a chance to go into detail on in this
show so protein yeah I'm talking about
protein and what you just did that you
segue into something else so can you
answer definitively do you think I've
presented very good arguments against
your rebuttal about both protein quality
including the amount and the ratio and
about protein quality and quantity
including digestibility and amino acids
cause I think the protein quantity is
it's still an issue or the question of
getting but how I mean you've got to
have some ideological arguments Chris
I'm sorry but you're like I have
disproven your a bottle on protein and
on b12
I think the quality and quantity still
matter the quality the so even though
that scale was developed for the FAO
there's still a difference a
quantitative difference in the amino
acid profile didn't argue with the
adjustability I didn't argue with that
that was not my point but if it's about
amino acids and it's about protein
content and digestibility if what he's
saying is correct and there really is no
need to eat meat that's what isn't
but that isn't that is his argument for
protein I mean you can like come up with
some other like you we can go at
nutrient if you want to look at nutrient
profiles and like then we can look at
that but you've got to admit I presented
some good arguments in both favor of
quantity and I hadn't seen that last
okay you from two thousand so I just
want to sum it up I want to sum it up my
slide verdict just one last slide on
this well I mean yeah one well
I got slides proving the outcomes as
well but if you just want to look at
this is not me this is not me making up
like a it's like oh I'm a vegan I'm just
making stuff up like there's a bunch of
bullshit that's put out by vegans about
arguments that are totally green yeah
and honestly I think vegans are like the
worst people for their own movement
I agree it's like like throwing blood on
people that are wearing like fur jackets
or whatever think it's ridiculous right
but that doesn't don't this don't lump
me in and the film in with vegans and
you've done a far better job of
explaining things here than you did even
in the film yeah but it's very tricky is
worth three and a half hours in right
well I would have made a 10 hour film
and I it was upsetting sure you really
people say oh you first of all the color
audience that were married
half of the athletes you found you
didn't put in the film because they
stopped being vegan completely not true
you're also a bunch of experts we didn't
put in the film that we couldn't put in
and we didn't put them in because there
wasn't room it was like I understand in
filmmaking it's called killing your
babies there was amazing scenes that
were being really convincing that we
couldn't put in like the evidence in the
film is far less than 1% of the evidence
that I why don't you guys do it as like
a Netflix thing we series while because
wild country we do like seven hours I
would like we're consistent like why is
your thing to do because like how many
people are gonna sit down how do you
many people gonna watch this well I know
I mean I don't know millions so when
when we're talking about like we don't
really have that much time left
unfortunately because we are here at
three and a half hours in and I have
another one right after this but what
what about the film do you think he
hasn't refuted your criticism we just
put that last slide
yes please what is it again in slide 34
and also I've got a bunch of slides
showing that actually here we got
there's no research to suggest that
protein recommendations are different
for athletes allow following a
vegetarian diet than for those on an
omnivorous diet now that is the handbook
the textbook that is used when you
become a board certified specialist in
sports Dietetics so this what this is
basically saying is what you said
earlier the amino acid profile once you
reach a certain point in a certain
doesn't matter grounds for you've got to
reach that amount anyway even with meat
that's the thing okay
so yeah so I'm and and again what about
the film do you think that he hasn't
refuted your criticisms I mean rethink
III would love that's going to be
there's the blood flow and endothelial
function Automation let's get to the
meat and let's do it let's start through
the erection erection that's the most
scientific part of the movie was it was
the other thing Chris well I mean just
talking about inflammation and
endothelial function and we'll take
cancer and dairy the chicken and fish in
cancer cancer I can review all of that
all of your claims one look at the
election and the Dolphins things that
related to endothelial function let's
why don't we talk about research about
endothelial function yeah okay right
okay that's related so okay endothelial
so regarding those with this because
it's already 2:30 it's just a shame
because like all the other claims he
made before all right what other ones
were involved in the in the interview or
in in us in the fellow Mike nothing when
you said and I've seen you say this on
interviews we have 22 years of research
showing the single high fat meal impairs
and they lleol function hmm that study
was called it was from 1997 so now
multiple studies and I can put them up
if you want
so that's 22 years from the effect of a
single high fat meal on endothelial
function and healthy subjects so this
compared a nine hundred calorie diet
both were on nine hundred calories one
group pat was eating 50 grams of fat in
one group with zero grams of fat the
high fat meal was an egg mcmuffin a
sausage McMuffin I'm not talking about
the two hash browns and non caffeinated
drink off from McDonald's yeah I'm not
one well what at which one are you
talking about a bunch okay well I got a
bunch to actually contradict that so
that's the same study the same
researcher that did that study
found that taking vitamin C after the
high-fat meal completely eliminated the
the effect that it had on endothelial
function which suggests that a healthy
omnivorous diet with plants wouldn't
have the same impact
there was a 2019 review and this is will
be like Kresser dot CEO slash game
changers adding nuts avocados olives
berries spice blends orange juice red
wine and protein including milk protein
to a high-fat meal prevent endothelial
dysfunction and oxidative stress we've
got several studies that suggest that
dairy and egg proteins improve
endothelial function 2015 controlled
trial with 52 subjects dietary proteins
including milk and egg improved
endothelial function 2006 study adding
dietary protein to a high fat meal
prevented postprandial endothelial
dysfunction we have 2009 study followed
subjects for 12 weeks a low-carb diet
improved endothelial function whereas a
low-fat diet decreased it 2007 study
with follows your all of these studies
show the animal proteins don't increase
and you have to know more about
nutrition and it's really okay so first
of all you just you compared a low
carbon high carb I am NOT a I'm not for
health I'm not promoting high carb all
that wasn't the point the point is that
low carb diets that contain animal
products and that milk and egg protein
have been shown to sort of endothelial
function not worsen it right so we can
pay him in the film was the animal
protein worsens endothelial I because
that is the scientific consensus and we
keep going back to the tell us why tell
us all that is seafood consumption
protects against endothelial damage
seafood is an animal protein
Mediterranean diet which includes animal
products improves pulse wave velocity
blood flow markers of atherosclerosis
these are studies in the peer-reviewed
literature yeah but we're not for them
so what's wrong with us
so the industry funding studies what you
do wait wait who said anything about
these being industry funded about what
you
do see is compare everything is healthy
compared to what healthy or unhealthy
compared to what so if you have a low
carb diet and you replaced a bunch of
white sugar and flour you might not see
it's gonna the outcome is going to be a
deeper that's a claim that was made in
the film is that animal product animal
proteins worsen endothelial function I
just listed a whole bunch of studies
especially those suggesting here's one
that says influence of food patterns on
endothelial biomarkers a systematic
review the conclusion was that healthy
food patterns abundant in fruits and
vegetables had a a beneficial impact on
endothelial function westernized
patterns higher intakes of processed
meats sweets fried foods refined grains
were positively associated to
inflammation which makes my point in
another no it makes my point which is
quality matters is no McMuffin and Egg
McMuffins and you show that I'm not
showing that my studies are okay but
let's let him explain his studies so for
example slide 71 I I purposely didn't
include those studies because I don't
think that they're a good thing to
compare to
so slide 71 okay this is oh this is nice
because there's a graph right so you can
see so everyone's saying like that fat
in the blood that's normal well what do
you mean by normal yeah lots of people
do that that's normal that doesn't mean
it's optimal when you see the fat in the
blood and by the way it was a film we
couldn't throw everything in so when you
see fat that's called postprandial like
penis that means after a meal fat in the
blood right that is associated with up
to 50% decreased endothelial function
which means you nest nitric oxide is
produced which means that the arteries
can't open up as much less oxygen less
nutrients to the muscles okay so that is
a surgery as you can see in this graph I
don't know so the solid line is the the
tribe no solder line is how much your
arteries are dieting flow mediated face
so dilation right
so as the triglycerides this is after
the meal okay which was by the way a
shake of whipping cream and liquid
chocolate and nonfat dry milk okay as
the as you eat the meal you can see that
the triglyceride 0 that's the fat in
your blood see between 2 and 4 hours it
kind of Peaks we measured those athletes
at 2 hours and
yeah this is not just a film it's been
done for over 20 years in the scientific
literature so as you can see in the
graph right Joe
as the dotted line goes up that's the
appearance of more fat in the blood
right you get that liked essence the
milkiness of the blood you can see that
very clearly that the flow media
dilation drops so it drops by 11% okay
if you look for example that makes sense
so that when you have those fat in the
blood your ability to your arteries to
expand goes down there's no like what
that's not an egg McMuffin that is a
milk and whipping cream and that's it so
now if you go to slide 73 now I agree
this had some so they compared now
they're here yeah we can skip the next
one that was 11% okay so here what I've
done is the only thing I changed about
this graph is I put the green dots for
the plant-based meal and the red dots
for the Allen West meal so they were
eating Korean barbecue egg milk oil
mayonnaise rice and vegetables and on
the other hand they were having a vegan
meal of soup kimchi vegetables orange
juice apple
so as match for calories at 800 calories
the green is in red and the so the green
is plants and the red is animal-based so
I don't know if you want to go into
there basically you've slide 74 again
please try to remember a lot of people
listening oh sorry if you want to read
the mean you can if you want here
changes of serum triglycerides were
negatively correlated with changes of
FMD for meat fur mediated dilation
well low-carb diets often will lower
serum triglycerides and they can finally
not post not post panda li not after the
meal for that which is important to test
because that lasts for 6 3 hours and
what do you do again you eat another
animal-based meal so the next part draw
this out good then how is it that
triglycerides go down over time if your
body's because your body adapts to it so
Joe can you read the second this study
suggests that acute HT G's
hypertriglyceridemia that's the fat in
the blood which causes endothelial
dysfunction via enhanced oxidant stress
and that and this may pave the way for
the development of our thorough
and powerful atherosclerosis under
cronic so what that saying like in the
short using short term and chronic long
term is under acute then it affects your
endothelial function your ability to
exercise and perform and in the long
term effects chronic collisions like
heart disease and if you go to slide 75
remember that chart that we looked at
with the green dots and the red dots 8.2
percent decrease in FMD two hours
following the animal-based meal two
point seven percent increase in fmd two
hours following the plant-based meal
okay so you got less blood flow so Chris
makes out there's no science no evidence
it was just this crazy thing that they
made up it was the co-chair of the
cardiovascular Committee for the NFL
that has been researching this for years
I didn't say that James I said there was
a lot of other evidence contradicting it
so right but we want to bring up study
you can add effects of dietary
carbohydrate restriction versus low-fat
diet on flow mediated dilation this is
what you've been talking about peak flow
mediated dilation at three hours
increased from five point one percent to
six point five percent the carbohydrate
restricted group and decreased from
seven point nine percent to five point
two percent in the low-fat diet right
12-week low carbohydrate diet and proved
postprandial vascular function more than
a low-fat diet right because the low-fat
diet has a bunch of like white flour and
stuff in it that's the thing but that's
why there's often the low carb diets due
to their diets with animal if we're
talking about protein the claim in the
film was that animal protein causes
endothelial dysfunction somehow we've
gotten off talking about fat and I've
just I'm not gonna mention many studies
that show that dietary proteins
including milk and egg improve
endothelial function no they don't fish
okay right here nobody Joe so what are
these you can't just say a study right
because I Chris can bring up dietary
proteins improve endothelial function
under fasting conditions but not in the
post prandial state with no effects on
markers of low-grade inflammation
attrition in 2015 study okay but dietary
Pro
doesn't even necessarily mean
animal-based programs right no its
including milk and egg including yeah
Chuck tonight this the bottom line is
that he can present any study I'd have
to dig into it see the funding whatever
because it's always what's compared to
so you can show a huge benefit for eggs
if you compare it to Lorde right you can
this all these were proteins that
included soy soy milk and egg and they
all improved endothelial function yeah
it's and then another dietary protein
milk or soy to a high-fat mule
prevented postprandial endothelial
dysfunction and then there are the two
low-carb studies that I mentioned
there's controlled trial that found that
a low-carb high-fat diet improved pulse
wave velocity which is another marker of
endothelial function there are studies
of the Mediterranean diet which is a
healthy diet pattern that includes some
animal products include improved pulse
wave velocity seafood consumption
protects against endothelial damage yes
can I had it compared to beef it does
can I just say like for example you said
you were trying to refute the study
about the increased risk of cancer colon
cancer between vegetarians and
non-vegetarians right the three times
increased risk with those about white
meat like fish or chicken once or twice
a week and then you go to a
meta-analysis which is not comparing
you're comparing fish to bacon or beef
of course comparing any that these are
controlled trials that look at dietary
proteins milk is an egg but Chris first
of all you have emitted that you don't
even know how to read it the science is
that fair do you honestly feel qualified
to read even a single paper yes but you
don't know how to read a forestation
research I took a master's level
research methodology class I'm referring
to studies that are review literature
it's like and you haven't answered the
question
if protein impairs endothelial function
why are studies showing that milk and
egg don't do that George don't move
George film studies showing but like the
heart rate went out when you
a knock out without touching someone
just because you can show studies that I
can't like I haven't had a chance to
read and dig into doesn't need me my
point no no I gave like the film has
been reviewed and has been accredited by
the defense health agency yeah right so
you think that they like the science
your basically your your your debunk
which you failed miserably to debunk the
film right
I have proven again and again that your
points were invalid I have presented
data with healthier meals you try
thought I was going to go to the feeling
someone McDonald's I didn't I showed one
with just basically dairy just Dairy
increasing in a knife showed three or
four studies like dairy proteins then I
am talking about and I interfere with
endothelial function and actually
improve it and the bottom bottom line is
Jo right that at each step of the way
chris is not in line with the scientific
consensus okay not on protein
recommendations not on definition of
carbohydrates not on and the thela
function not on heme iron it's just not
it but you shouldn't be having him on to
say he isn't he said himself he's not an
expert in nutrition he is unable to read
us and unable to read a single study and
understand it I am not qualified
that's a mischaracterization okay then
tell me tell me what the competence
interval of this in the forest plot so
listen i'm presenting i've never anyone
i'm saying anything about put myself out
like I'm the the expert that that is is
doing these studies that same way that
you did you collected information on the
scientific consensus which some leading
researchers with thousands of years
something that there is not was good
there's there are many experts that
would disagree but a same thing is like
saying no it's not the same at all it's
absolutely not the same that there's the
the consensus of experts that agree that
we should be on a hundred percent or
even 95 percent plant-based
diet is the same as the consensus on
climate change no not even close to the
parallel is that the scientific
consensus says we should be in
predominantly plant-based diets and that
vegan and federate vegan diets are
propyl for all stated lifecycle I've
shown that you can get enough protein
I've shown that the quality Deer scoring
doesn't matter I've shown that the b12
stuff that you got is completely wrong
like what else do you want me to show
you you want me to show you that like
even despite having lower creatine
levels because people have pointed out
in the film all you said as long as you
get all the amino acids that's enough
you didn't point out that the study said
they didn't tell the vegetarians have
lower creatine stores therefore it may
affect performance they didn't test it
I've got a bunch of studies where it has
been tested where they had vegetarians
and meat eaters had equivocal fat free
mass equivalent equivalent time to
fatigue despite lower creatine levels
and we know that creatine is ergogenic
i've also got other studies showing that
when vegetarians actually take
supplemental creatine they get increased
games of over one pound of muscle over
the meat-eaters
so despite lower creatine which we know
the most studied supplement because
their intake of creatine is lower yes
and so and so when they're supplementing
they see a bigger response you could
look at that the other way you could say
you should have more creatine in their
diet and then they wouldn't need to
supplement with that to get the bigger
response right but I'm saying it points
out that despite lower creatine soles
which we know are go genic which are
performance-enhancing they still have
equivocal fat free mass muscle and power
output and time to fatigue and when you
add creatine in you get a benefit now
I'm not saying that everyone should be
taking creatine but if you're trying to
build as much muscle as possible I think
you should and by the way meat eaters
also tend to supplement that are trying
to body build with creatine as well so
I'm saying that despite the fact of
lower creatine which we know is the
problem would you argue that's like the
probably the most well studied and best
supplement that we know of that can help
yeah ok fair enough
so despite lower creatine people on
plant-based diets can still have as much
muscle mass and when they hate creatine
they get even more than the meat-eaters
and I've got by a bunch of science to
prove that too
so basically Joe if someone watched the
last episode where he tried to debunk
the film for 2050 minutes do you feel
that i fairly addressed a lot of the
critiques and i've can address a lot
more he talks about nutrient quality he
likes to refer to like diet quality says
that we're lowering we're lowering
certain nutrients yeah vegans are low
typically in b12 and be calcium zinc
because they eat a bunch of shit but
meat eaters are low in about nine so he
likes to point to a nutrient score which
favors that's not comparing equivalent
vegans vegans and vegetarians in general
are do you know these smokeless they
have a higher drink less they have a
higher diet quality and jack apples too
right because i do all of the things
that are better for health including
eating a plant-based diet because he
thinks that just the only one thing that
they don't do better is more plants so
what he's saying that you lump in
meat-eaters with people that eat the
standard american diet when you say the
meat eaters you're not talking about
people who are eating organic gets sixty
percent of their calories from ultra
processed and refined no that's why
they're nutrient but that's what they
are saying just said that i'm not
comparing like Joe Rogan's and his diet
versus an equivalent is that you are
saying that vegans are typically more
deficient in certain nutrients they are
in certain nutrients but that's because
a lot of people aren't smart don't like
and so you're looking at the overall
group of them versus the people that are
doing it as recommended by these studies
that are showing the appropriate amount
of amino acids they're doing it's just
they're balancing it out and you variety
you're not landing it I didn't think
about it I don't count how much protein
I'm taking I just need a wide variety
and if a really good source actually is
nutritionfacts.org and he's got this
useful thing called yeah he doesn't like
that because it's not in alignment
what's wrong with the nutrition facts
that org oh it's it's just has a very
strong plant-based agenda yeah cuz they
well because they follow the science so
anyway forget all of the useful videos
are on there you do like three minute
videos for people to learn about the
science gives all the the references but
the useful thing the really usable thing
is he has like the daily doesn't you
know about what all of the evidence is
Charlie should be eating
but you're eating meat or not all of the
evidence showing like how much legumes
how much fruits how much vegetables you
know with flaxseed and you know these
types of things so it's just like it's
like a fridge magnet you can throw on
your fridge and James made an excellent
point Chris do you have anything to say
in closing no thank you for appreciating
felt a bit combative no you knocked it
out of the park you did a fantastic job
I think you mean inmates me can say well
the let me explain my position coming in
here I felt like you'd put your film out
I felt Chris felt the same way having
you in here while he did debunked it was
just gonna be a waste of time I did put
your position out he was gonna chance to
be drunk but I've also felt that would
be unfair to not have you come in and
explain and refute his debunking and I
think you did a fantastic job I really
appreciate that my pleasure and love to
come back on and talk about God is
unless awesome whatever man let's do
that next time
awesome okay thank you Chris thank you
everybody
[Applause]
[Music]